---
reference_id: PMID:23220694
title: The plant ontology as a tool for comparative plant anatomy and genomic analyses.
authors:
- Cooper L
- Walls RL
- Elser J
- Gandolfo MA
- Stevenson DW
- Smith B
- Preece J
- Athreya B
- Mungall CJ
- Rensing S
- Hiss M
- Lang D
- Reski R
- Berardini TZ
- Li D
- Huala E
- Schaeffer M
- Menda N
- Arnaud E
- Shrestha R
- Yamazaki Y
- Jaiswal P
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs163
keywords:
- Alkyl and Aryl Transferases/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Flowers/genetics
- "Genome, Plant"
- Genomics/methods
- Internet
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Multigene Family
- Phenotype
- "Plant Leaves/anatomy & histology"
- Plant Proteins/genetics
- "Plants/anatomy & histology, genetics"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The plant ontology as a tool for comparative plant anatomy and genomic analyses.
**Authors:** Cooper L, Walls RL, Elser J, Gandolfo MA, Stevenson DW, Smith B, Preece J, Athreya B, Mungall CJ, Rensing S, Hiss M, Lang D, Reski R, Berardini TZ, Li D, Huala E, Schaeffer M, Menda N, Arnaud E, Shrestha R, Yamazaki Y, Jaiswal P
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcs163](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcs163)

## Content

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb;54(2):e1. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs163. Epub 2012 Dec
5.

The plant ontology as a tool for comparative plant anatomy and genomic analyses.

Cooper L(1), Walls RL, Elser J, Gandolfo MA, Stevenson DW, Smith B, Preece J, 
Athreya B, Mungall CJ, Rensing S, Hiss M, Lang D, Reski R, Berardini TZ, Li D, 
Huala E, Schaeffer M, Menda N, Arnaud E, Shrestha R, Yamazaki Y, Jaiswal P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, 2082 
Cordley Hall, Corvallis, OR 97331-2902, USA.

The Plant Ontology (PO; http://www.plantontology.org/) is a publicly available, 
collaborative effort to develop and maintain a controlled, structured vocabulary 
('ontology') of terms to describe plant anatomy, morphology and the stages of 
plant development. The goals of the PO are to link (annotate) gene expression 
and phenotype data to plant structures and stages of plant development, using 
the data model adopted by the Gene Ontology. From its original design covering 
only rice, maize and Arabidopsis, the scope of the PO has been expanded to 
include all green plants. The PO was the first multispecies anatomy ontology 
developed for the annotation of genes and phenotypes. Also, to our knowledge, it 
was one of the first biological ontologies that provides translations (via 
synonyms) in non-English languages such as Japanese and Spanish. As of Release 
#18 (July 2012), there are about 2.2 million annotations linking PO terms to 
>110,000 unique data objects representing genes or gene models, proteins, RNAs, 
germplasm and quantitative trait loci (QTLs) from 22 plant species. In this 
paper, we focus on the plant anatomical entity branch of the PO, describing the 
organizing principles, resources available to users and examples of how the PO 
is integrated into other plant genomics databases and web portals. We also 
provide two examples of comparative analyses, demonstrating how the ontology 
structure and PO-annotated data can be used to discover the patterns of 
expression of the LEAFY (LFY) and terpene synthase (TPS) gene homologs.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcs163
PMCID: PMC3583023
PMID: 23220694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]