---
reference_id: PMID:33426407
title: "EPA's DSSTox database: History of development of a curated chemistry resource supporting computational toxicology research."
authors:
- Grulke CM
- Williams AJ
- Thillanadarajah I
- Richard AM
journal: Comput Toxicol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100096
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EPA's DSSTox database: History of development of a curated chemistry resource supporting computational toxicology research.
**Authors:** Grulke CM, Williams AJ, Thillanadarajah I, Richard AM
**Journal:** Comput Toxicol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100096](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100096)

## Content

1. Comput Toxicol. 2019 Nov 1;12:10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100096. doi: 
10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100096.

EPA's DSSTox database: History of development of a curated chemistry resource 
supporting computational toxicology research.

Grulke CM(1), Williams AJ(1), Thillanadarajah I(2), Richard AM(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Computational Toxicology, Office of Research & 
Development, US Environmental Protection Agency, Mail Drop D143-02, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
(2)Senior Environmental Employment Program, US Environmental Protection Agency, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.

The US Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Distributed Structure-Searchable 
Toxicity (DSSTox) database, launched publicly in 2004, currently exceeds 875 K 
substances spanning hundreds of lists of interest to EPA and environmental 
researchers. From its inception, DSSTox has focused curation efforts on 
resolving chemical identifier errors and conflicts in the public domain towards 
the goal of assigning accurate chemical structures to data and lists of 
importance to the environmental research and regulatory community. Accurate 
structure-data associations, in turn, are necessary inputs to structure-based 
predictive models supporting hazard and risk assessments. In 2014, the legacy, 
manually curated DSSTox_V1 content was migrated to a MySQL data model, with 
modern cheminformatics tools supporting both manual and automated curation 
processes to increase efficiencies. This was followed by sequential auto-loads 
of filtered portions of three public datasets: EPA's Substance Registry Services 
(SRS), the National Library of Medicine's ChemID, and PubChem. This process was 
constrained by a key requirement of uniquely mapped identifiers (i.e., CAS RN, 
name and structure) for each substance, rejecting content where any two 
identifiers were conflicted either within or across datasets. This rejected 
content highlighted the degree of conflicting, inaccurate substance-structure ID 
mappings in the public domain, ranging from 12% (within EPA SRS) to 49% (across 
ChemID and PubChem). Substances successfully added to DSSTox from each auto-load 
were assigned to one of five qc_levels, conveying curator confidence in each 
dataset. This process enabled a significant expansion of DSSTox content to 
provide better coverage of the chemical landscape of interest to environmental 
scientists, while retaining focus on the accuracy of substance-structure-data 
associations. Currently, DSSTox serves as the core foundation of EPA's CompTox 
Chemicals Dashboard [https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard], which provides public 
access to DSSTox content in support of a broad range of modeling and research 
activities within EPA and, increasingly, across the field of computational 
toxicology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comtox.2019.100096
PMCID: PMC7787967
PMID: 33426407

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.