---
reference_id: PMID:25361966
title: "ADReCS: an ontology database for aiding standardization and hierarchical classification of adverse drug reaction terms."
authors:
- Cai MC
- Xu Q
- Pan YJ
- Pan W
- Ji N
- Li YB
- Jin HJ
- Liu K
- Ji ZL
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1066
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Classification/methods
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions
- Internet
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADReCS: an ontology database for aiding standardization and hierarchical classification of adverse drug reaction terms.
**Authors:** Cai MC, Xu Q, Pan YJ, Pan W, Ji N, Li YB, Jin HJ, Liu K, Ji ZL
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gku1066](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1066)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D907-13. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gku1066. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

ADReCS: an ontology database for aiding standardization and hierarchical 
classification of adverse drug reaction terms.

Cai MC(1), Xu Q(1), Pan YJ(2), Pan W(1), Ji N(3), Li YB(1), Jin HJ(1), Liu K(1), 
Ji ZL(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stress Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, P.R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Stress Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, P.R. China The Key Laboratory for Chemical 
Biology of Fujian Province, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, P.R. 
China.
(3)Xiamen Huli Center For Disease Control and Prevention, Xiamen, Fujian 361000, 
P.R. China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Stress Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, P.R. China The Key Laboratory for Chemical 
Biology of Fujian Province, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, P.R. China 
appo@xmu.edu.cn.

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are noxious and unexpected effects during normal 
drug therapy. They have caused significant clinical burden and been responsible 
for a large portion of new drug development failure. Molecular understanding and 
in silico evaluation of drug (or candidate) safety in laboratory is thus so 
desired, and unfortunately has been largely hindered by misuse of ADR terms. The 
growing impact of bioinformatics and systems biology in toxicological research 
also requires a specialized ADR term system that works beyond a simple glossary. 
Adverse Drug Reaction Classification System (ADReCS; 
http://bioinf.xmu.edu.cn/ADReCS) is a comprehensive ADR ontology database that 
provides not only ADR standardization but also hierarchical classification of 
ADR terms. The ADR terms were pre-assigned with unique digital IDs and at the 
same time were well organized into a four-level ADR hierarchy tree for building 
an ADR-ADR relation. Currently, the database covers 6544 standard ADR terms and 
34,796 synonyms. It also incorporates information of 1355 single active 
ingredient drugs and 134,022 drug-ADR pairs. In summary, ADReCS offers an 
opportunity for direct computation on ADR terms and also provides clues to 
mining common features underlying ADRs.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1066
PMCID: PMC4383906
PMID: 25361966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]