---
reference_id: PMID:21991315
title: "The chemical information ontology: provenance and disambiguation for chemical data on the biological semantic web."
authors:
- Hastings J
- Chepelev L
- Willighagen E
- Adams N
- Steinbeck C
- Dumontier M
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025513
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Automation
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Factual"
- Information Systems
- Internet
- "Models, Chemical"
- Semantics
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The chemical information ontology: provenance and disambiguation for chemical data on the biological semantic web.
**Authors:** Hastings J, Chepelev L, Willighagen E, Adams N, Steinbeck C, Dumontier M
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0025513](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0025513)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025513. Epub 2011 Oct
3.

The chemical information ontology: provenance and disambiguation for chemical 
data on the biological semantic web.

Hastings J(1), Chepelev L, Willighagen E, Adams N, Steinbeck C, Dumontier M.

Author information:
(1)Chemoinformatics and Metabolism, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom. hastings@ebi.ac.uk

Cheminformatics is the application of informatics techniques to solve chemical 
problems in silico. There are many areas in biology where cheminformatics plays 
an important role in computational research, including metabolism, proteomics, 
and systems biology. One critical aspect in the application of cheminformatics 
in these fields is the accurate exchange of data, which is increasingly 
accomplished through the use of ontologies. Ontologies are formal 
representations of objects and their properties using a logic-based ontology 
language. Many such ontologies are currently being developed to represent 
objects across all the domains of science. Ontologies enable the definition, 
classification, and support for querying objects in a particular domain, 
enabling intelligent computer applications to be built which support the work of 
scientists both within the domain of interest and across interrelated 
neighbouring domains. Modern chemical research relies on computational 
techniques to filter and organise data to maximise research productivity. The 
objects which are manipulated in these algorithms and procedures, as well as the 
algorithms and procedures themselves, enjoy a kind of virtual life within 
computers. We will call these information entities. Here, we describe our work 
in developing an ontology of chemical information entities, with a primary focus 
on data-driven research and the integration of calculated properties 
(descriptors) of chemical entities within a semantic web context. Our ontology 
distinguishes algorithmic, or procedural information from declarative, or 
factual information, and renders of particular importance the annotation of 
provenance to calculated data. The Chemical Information Ontology is being 
developed as an open collaborative project. More details, together with a 
downloadable OWL file, are available at 
http://code.google.com/p/semanticchemistry/ (license: CC-BY-SA).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025513
PMCID: PMC3184996
PMID: 21991315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.