---
reference_id: PMID:25378313
title: "An update on LNCipedia: a database for annotated human lncRNA sequences."
authors:
- Volders PJ
- Verheggen K
- Menschaert G
- Vandepoele K
- Martens L
- Vandesompele J
- Mestdagh P
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1060
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Internet
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Proteins/genetics
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An update on LNCipedia: a database for annotated human lncRNA sequences.
**Authors:** Volders PJ, Verheggen K, Menschaert G, Vandepoele K, Martens L, Vandesompele J, Mestdagh P
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gku1060](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1060)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D174-80. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gku1060. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

An update on LNCipedia: a database for annotated human lncRNA sequences.

Volders PJ(1), Verheggen K(2), Menschaert G(3), Vandepoele K(4), Martens L(2), 
Vandesompele J(1), Mestdagh P(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent 9000, Belgium.
(2)Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, Ghent 9000, Belgium Department 
of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Ghent 9000 Belgium.
(3)Department of Mathematical Modelling, Statistics and Bioinformatics, Ghent 
University, Ghent 9000, Belgium.
(4)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Gent 
9000, Belgium Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent 9000, Belgium.
(5)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent 9000, Belgium 
Pieter.Mestdagh@UGent.be.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr 30;43(8):4363-4. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv295.

The human genome is pervasively transcribed, producing thousands of non-coding 
RNA transcripts. The majority of these transcripts are long non-coding RNAs 
(lncRNAs) and novel lncRNA genes are being identified at rapid pace. To 
streamline these efforts, we created LNCipedia, an online repository of lncRNA 
transcripts and annotation. Here, we present LNCipedia 3.0 
(http://www.lncipedia.org), the latest version of the publicly available human 
lncRNA database. Compared to the previous version of LNCipedia, the database 
grew over five times in size, gaining over 90,000 new lncRNA transcripts. 
Assessment of the protein-coding potential of LNCipedia entries is improved with 
state-of-the art methods that include large-scale reprocessing of publicly 
available proteomics data. As a result, a high-confidence set of lncRNA 
transcripts with low coding potential is defined and made available for 
download. In addition, a tool to assess lncRNA gene conservation between human, 
mouse and zebrafish has been implemented.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1060
PMCID: PMC4383901
PMID: 25378313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]