---
reference_id: PMID:34750582
title: "Anatomical structures, cell types and biomarkers of the Human Reference Atlas."
authors:
- Börner K
- Teichmann SA
- Quardokus EM
- Gee JC
- Browne K
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Herr BW 2nd
- Bueckle A
- Paul H
- Haniffa M
- Jardine L
- Bernard A
- Ding SL
- Miller JA
- Lin S
- Halushka MK
- Boppana A
- Longacre TA
- Hickey J
- Lin Y
- Valerius MT
- He Y
- Pryhuber G
- Sun X
- Jorgensen M
- Radtke AJ
- Wasserfall C
- Ginty F
- Ho J
- Sunshine J
- Beuschel RT
- Brusko M
- Lee S
- Malhotra R
- Jain S
- Weber G
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41556-021-00788-6
keywords:
- Atlases as Topic
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Cell Biology
- Cell Lineage
- "Cells/classification, metabolism, pathology"
- Computer Graphics
- Disease
- Genomics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anatomical structures, cell types and biomarkers of the Human Reference Atlas.
**Authors:** Börner K, Teichmann SA, Quardokus EM, Gee JC, Browne K, Osumi-Sutherland D, Herr BW 2nd, Bueckle A, Paul H, Haniffa M, Jardine L, Bernard A, Ding SL, Miller JA, Lin S, Halushka MK, Boppana A, Longacre TA, Hickey J, Lin Y, Valerius MT, He Y, Pryhuber G, Sun X, Jorgensen M, Radtke AJ, Wasserfall C, Ginty F, Ho J, Sunshine J, Beuschel RT, Brusko M, Lee S, Malhotra R, Jain S, Weber G
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41556-021-00788-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-021-00788-6)

## Content

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2021 Nov;23(11):1117-1128. doi: 10.1038/s41556-021-00788-6.
Epub  2021 Nov 8.

Anatomical structures, cell types and biomarkers of the Human Reference Atlas.

Börner K(1), Teichmann SA(2), Quardokus EM(3), Gee JC(4), Browne K(5), 
Osumi-Sutherland D(6), Herr BW 2nd(3), Bueckle A(3), Paul H(3), Haniffa M(7), 
Jardine L(7), Bernard A(8), Ding SL(9), Miller JA(9), Lin S(10), Halushka 
MK(11), Boppana A(12), Longacre TA(13), Hickey J(13), Lin Y(14), Valerius 
MT(15), He Y(16), Pryhuber G(17), Sun X(18), Jorgensen M(19), Radtke AJ(20), 
Wasserfall C(19), Ginty F(21), Ho J(22), Sunshine J(23), Beuschel RT(20), Brusko 
M(19), Lee S(24), Malhotra R(15)(24), Jain S(25)(26), Weber G(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA. katy@indiana.edu.
(2)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, 
Cambridge, UK.
(7)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)The Kavli Foundation, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Allen Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(12)Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(13)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Surgery, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA.
(15)Harvard Institute of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Center for Computational 
Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(17)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
(18)Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(19)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(20)Center for Advanced Tissue Imaging, Laboratory of Immune System Biology, 
NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(21)Biology and Applied Physics, General Electric Research, Niskayuna, NY, USA.
(22)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(23)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(24)Division of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(25)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA.
(26)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(27)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.

The Human Reference Atlas (HRA) aims to map all of the cells of the human body 
to advance biomedical research and clinical practice. This Perspective presents 
collaborative work by members of 16 international consortia on two essential and 
interlinked parts of the HRA: (1) three-dimensional representations of anatomy 
that are linked to (2) tables that name and interlink major anatomical 
structures, cell types, plus biomarkers (ASCT+B). We discuss four examples that 
demonstrate the practical utility of the HRA.

© 2021. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-021-00788-6
PMCID: PMC10079270
PMID: 34750582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]