---
reference_id: PMID:20215436
title: Transcription factor regulation can be accurately predicted from the presence of target gene signatures in microarray gene expression data.
authors:
- Essaghir A
- Toffalini F
- Knoops L
- Kallin A
- van Helden J
- Demoulin JB
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq149
keywords:
- Becaplermin
- Catalogs as Topic
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Data Interpretation, Statistical"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Platelet-Derived Growth Factor/pharmacology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-sis
- Reproducibility of Results
- STAT Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Software
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcription factor regulation can be accurately predicted from the presence of target gene signatures in microarray gene expression data.
**Authors:** Essaghir A, Toffalini F, Knoops L, Kallin A, van Helden J, Demoulin JB
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkq149](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq149)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e120. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq149. Epub 2010
Mar  9.

Transcription factor regulation can be accurately predicted from the presence of 
target gene signatures in microarray gene expression data.

Essaghir A(1), Toffalini F, Knoops L, Kallin A, van Helden J, Demoulin JB.

Author information:
(1)de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, MEXP74.30, avenue 
Hippocrates 74-75, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Deciphering transcription factor networks from microarray data remains 
difficult. This study presents a simple method to infer the regulation of 
transcription factors from microarray data based on well-characterized target 
genes. We generated a catalog containing transcription factors associated with 
2720 target genes and 6401 experimentally validated regulations. When it was 
available, a distinction between transcriptional activation and inhibition was 
included for each regulation. Next, we built a tool (www.tfacts.org) that 
compares submitted gene lists with target genes in the catalog to detect 
regulated transcription factors. TFactS was validated with published lists of 
regulated genes in various models and compared to tools based on in silico 
promoter analysis. We next analyzed the NCI60 cancer microarray data set and 
showed the regulation of SOX10, MITF and JUN in melanomas. We then performed 
microarray experiments comparing gene expression response of human fibroblasts 
stimulated by different growth factors. TFactS predicted the specific activation 
of Signal transducer and activator of transcription factors by PDGF-BB, which 
was confirmed experimentally. Our results show that the expression levels of 
transcription factor target genes constitute a robust signature for 
transcription factor regulation, and can be efficiently used for microarray data 
mining.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq149
PMCID: PMC2887972
PMID: 20215436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]