---
reference_id: PMID:19850722
title: "GeMInA, Genomic Metadata for Infectious Agents, a geospatial surveillance pathogen database."
authors:
- Schriml LM
- Arze C
- Nadendla S
- Ganapathy A
- Felix V
- Mahurkar A
- Phillippy K
- Gussman A
- Angiuoli S
- Ghedin E
- White O
- Hall N
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp832
keywords:
- Animals
- Bacterial Infections/microbiology
- "Communicable Diseases/microbiology, virology"
- "Computational Biology/methods, trends"
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- "Genes, Bacterial"
- "Genes, Viral"
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval/methods
- Internet
- Software
- User-Computer Interface
- Virus Diseases/virology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GeMInA, Genomic Metadata for Infectious Agents, a geospatial surveillance pathogen database.
**Authors:** Schriml LM, Arze C, Nadendla S, Ganapathy A, Felix V, Mahurkar A, Phillippy K, Gussman A, Angiuoli S, Ghedin E, White O, Hall N
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkp832](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp832)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(Database issue):D754-64. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkp832.  Epub 2009 Oct 22.

GeMInA, Genomic Metadata for Infectious Agents, a geospatial surveillance 
pathogen database.

Schriml LM(1), Arze C, Nadendla S, Ganapathy A, Felix V, Mahurkar A, Phillippy 
K, Gussman A, Angiuoli S, Ghedin E, White O, Hall N.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. lschriml@som.umaryland.edu

The Gemina system (http://gemina.igs.umaryland.edu) identifies, standardizes and 
integrates the outbreak metadata for the breadth of NIAID category A-C viral and 
bacterial pathogens, thereby providing an investigative and surveillance tool 
describing the Who [Host], What [Disease, Symptom], When [Date], Where 
[Location] and How [Pathogen, Environmental Source, Reservoir, Transmission 
Method] for each pathogen. The Gemina database will provide a greater 
understanding of the interactions of viral and bacterial pathogens with their 
hosts and infectious diseases through in-depth literature text-mining, 
integrated outbreak metadata, outbreak surveillance tools, extensive ontology 
development, metadata curation and representative genomic sequence 
identification and standards development. The Gemina web interface provides 
metadata selection and retrieval of a pathogen's; Infection Systems (Pathogen, 
Host, Disease, Transmission Method and Anatomy) and Incidents (Location and 
Date) along with a hosts Age and Gender. The Gemina system provides an 
integrated investigative and geospatial surveillance system connecting 
pathogens, pathogen products and disease anchored on the taxonomic ID of the 
pathogen and host to identify the breadth of hosts and diseases known for these 
pathogens, to identify the extent of outbreak locations, and to identify unique 
genomic regions with the DNA Signature Insignia Detection Tool.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkp832
PMCID: PMC2808878
PMID: 19850722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]