---
reference_id: PMID:31888755
title: "OHMI: the ontology of host-microbiome interactions."
authors:
- He Y
- Wang H
- Zheng J
- Beiting DP
- Masci AM
- Yu H
- Liu K
- Wu J
- Curtis JL
- Smith B
- Alekseyenko AV
- Obeid JS
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-019-0217-1
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Microbiota
content_type: abstract_only
---

# OHMI: the ontology of host-microbiome interactions.
**Authors:** He Y, Wang H, Zheng J, Beiting DP, Masci AM, Yu H, Liu K, Wu J, Curtis JL, Smith B, Alekseyenko AV, Obeid JS
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-019-0217-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-019-0217-1)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2019 Dec 30;10(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s13326-019-0217-1.

OHMI: the ontology of host-microbiome interactions.

He Y(1), Wang H(2)(3), Zheng J(4), Beiting DP(5), Masci AM(6), Yu H(2)(7), Liu 
K(8), Wu J(9), Curtis JL(2)(10), Smith B(11), Alekseyenko AV(12), Obeid JS(12).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. 
yongqunh@med.umich.edu.
(2)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Daqing Branch of Harbin Medical University, Daqing, 163319, Heilongjiang, 
China.
(4)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104, USA.
(5)University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
(7)People's Hospital of Guizhou Province, Guiyang, 550025, Guizhou, China.
(8)School of Public Health, Anhui Medical University, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 
230032, Anhui, China.
(9)Center for Cancer Bioinformatics, Peking University Cancer Hospital & 
Institute, Beijing, 100142, China.
(10)Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine Section, Medical Service, VA Ann Arbor 
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, USA.
(11)University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 14260, USA.
(12)Department of Public Health Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, 29425, USA.

BACKGROUND: Host-microbiome interactions (HMIs) are critical for the modulation 
of biological processes and are associated with several diseases. Extensive HMI 
studies have generated large amounts of data. We propose that the logical 
representation of the knowledge derived from these data and the standardized 
representation of experimental variables and processes can foster integration of 
data and reproducibility of experiments and thereby further HMI knowledge 
discovery.
METHODS: Through a multi-institutional collaboration, a community-based Ontology 
of Host-Microbiome Interactions (OHMI) was developed following the Open 
Biological/Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) Foundry principles. As an OBO library 
ontology, OHMI leverages established ontologies to create logically structured 
representations of (1) microbiomes, microbial taxonomy, host species, host 
anatomical entities, and HMIs under different conditions and (2) associated 
study protocols and types of data analysis and experimental results.
RESULTS: Aligned with the Basic Formal Ontology, OHMI comprises over 1000 terms, 
including terms imported from more than 10 existing ontologies together with 
some 500 OHMI-specific terms. A specific OHMI design pattern was generated to 
represent typical host-microbiome interaction studies. As one major OHMI use 
case, drawing on data from over 50 peer-reviewed publications, we identified 
over 100 bacteria and fungi from the gut, oral cavity, skin, and airway that are 
associated with six rheumatic diseases including rheumatoid arthritis. Our 
ontological study identified new high-level microbiota taxonomical structures. 
Two microbiome-related competency questions were also designed and addressed. We 
were also able to use OHMI to represent statistically significant results 
identified from a large existing microbiome database data analysis.
CONCLUSION: OHMI represents entities and relations in the domain of HMIs. It 
supports shared knowledge representation, data and metadata standardization and 
integration, and can be used in formulation of advanced queries for purposes of 
data analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-019-0217-1
PMCID: PMC6937947
PMID: 31888755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.