---
reference_id: PMID:38301657
title: "FlyBase: updates to the Drosophila genes and genomes database."
authors:
- Öztürk-Çolak A
- Marygold SJ
- Antonazzo G
- Attrill H
- Goutte-Gattat D
- Jenkins VK
- Matthews BB
- Millburn G
- Dos Santos G
- Tabone CJ
- FlyBase Consortium
journal: Genetics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyad211
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Drosophila melanogaster/genetics
- "Genes, Insect"
- "Genome, Insect"
- Genomics/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FlyBase: updates to the Drosophila genes and genomes database.
**Authors:** Öztürk-Çolak A, Marygold SJ, Antonazzo G, Attrill H, Goutte-Gattat D, Jenkins VK, Matthews BB, Millburn G, Dos Santos G, Tabone CJ, FlyBase Consortium
**Journal:** Genetics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/iyad211](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad211)

## Content

1. Genetics. 2024 May 7;227(1):iyad211. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyad211.

FlyBase: updates to the Drosophila genes and genomes database.

Öztürk-Çolak A(1), Marygold SJ(1), Antonazzo G(1), Attrill H(1), Goutte-Gattat 
D(1), Jenkins VK(2), Matthews BB(2), Millburn G(1), Dos Santos G(2), Tabone 
CJ(2); FlyBase Consortium.

Collaborators: Perrimon N, Gelbart SR, Broll K, Crosby M, Dos Santos G, Falls K, 
Gramates LS, Jenkins VK, Longden I, Matthews BB, Seme J, Tabone CJ, Zhou P, 
Zytkovicz M, Brown N, Antonazzo G, Attrill H, Goutte-Gattat D, Larkin A, 
Marygold S, McLachlan A, Millburn G, Pilgrim C, Öztürk-Çolak A, Kaufman T, Calvi 
B, Campbell S, Goodman J, Strelets V, Thurmond J, Cripps R, Lovato T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA.

FlyBase (flybase.org) is a model organism database and knowledge base about 
Drosophila melanogaster, commonly known as the fruit fly. Researchers from 
around the world rely on the genetic, genomic, and functional information 
available in FlyBase, as well as its tools to view and interrogate these data. 
In this article, we describe the latest developments and updates to FlyBase. 
These include the introduction of single-cell RNA sequencing data, improved 
content and display of functional information, updated orthology pipelines, new 
chemical reports, and enhancements to our outreach resources.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyad211
PMCID: PMC11075543
PMID: 38301657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The author(s) declare no 
conflicts of interest.