---
reference_id: PMID:36165955
title: "qPTM: an updated database for PTM dynamics in human, mouse, rat and yeast."
authors:
- Yu K
- Wang Y
- Zheng Y
- Liu Z
- Zhang Q
- Wang S
- Zhao Q
- Zhang X
- Li X
- Xu RH
- Liu ZX
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac820
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Rats
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Proteome/metabolism
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/metabolism
- "Databases, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# qPTM: an updated database for PTM dynamics in human, mouse, rat and yeast.
**Authors:** Yu K, Wang Y, Zheng Y, Liu Z, Zhang Q, Wang S, Zhao Q, Zhang X, Li X, Xu RH, Liu ZX
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac820](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac820)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D479-D487. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac820.

qPTM: an updated database for PTM dynamics in human, mouse, rat and yeast.

Yu K(1), Wang Y(1), Zheng Y(1), Liu Z(1), Zhang Q(1), Wang S(1), Zhao Q(1), 
Zhang X(1), Li X(2), Xu RH(1)(3), Liu ZX(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou 510060, China.
(2)Precision Medicine Institute, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(3)Research Unit of Precision Diagnosis and Treatment for Gastrointestinal 
Cancer, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are critical molecular mechanisms that 
regulate protein functions temporally and spatially in various organisms. Since 
most PTMs are dynamically regulated, quantifying PTM events under different 
states is crucial for understanding biological processes and diseases. With the 
rapid development of high-throughput proteomics technologies, massive 
quantitative PTM proteome datasets have been generated. Thus, a comprehensive 
one-stop data resource for surfing big data will benefit the community. Here, we 
updated our previous phosphorylation dynamics database qPhos to the qPTM 
(http://qptm.omicsbio.info). In qPTM, 11 482 553 quantification events among six 
types of PTMs, including phosphorylation, acetylation, glycosylation, 
methylation, SUMOylation and ubiquitylation in four different organisms were 
collected and integrated, and the matched proteome datasets were included if 
available. The raw mass spectrometry based false discovery rate control and the 
recurrences of identifications among datasets were integrated into a scoring 
system to assess the reliability of the PTM sites. Browse and search functions 
were improved to facilitate users in swiftly and accurately acquiring specific 
information. The results page was revised with more abundant annotations, and 
time-course dynamics data were visualized in trend lines. We expected the qPTM 
database to be a much more powerful and comprehensive data repository for the 
PTM research community.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac820
PMCID: PMC9825568
PMID: 36165955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]