---
reference_id: PMID:19838050
title: Kinship in the SRP RNA family.
authors:
- Rosenblad MA
- Larsen N
- Samuelsson T
- Zwieb C
journal: RNA Biol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.4161/rna.6.5.9753
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Classification
- Conserved Sequence
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- "RNA/classification, genetics"
- "RNA, Archaeal"
- "RNA, Bacterial"
- "RNA, Fungal"
- "RNA, Plant"
- "RNA, Protozoan"
- Signal Recognition Particle/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kinship in the SRP RNA family.
**Authors:** Rosenblad MA, Larsen N, Samuelsson T, Zwieb C
**Journal:** RNA Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4161/rna.6.5.9753](https://doi.org/10.4161/rna.6.5.9753)

## Content

1. RNA Biol. 2009 Nov-Dec;6(5):508-16. doi: 10.4161/rna.6.5.9753. Epub 2009 Nov
7.

Kinship in the SRP RNA family.

Rosenblad MA(1), Larsen N, Samuelsson T, Zwieb C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, 
Sweden.

The signal recognition particle (SRP) is a ribonucleoprotein complex which 
participates in the targeting of protein to cellular membranes. The RNA 
component of the SRP has been found in all domains of life, but the size of the 
molecule and the number of RNA secondary structure elements vary considerably 
between the different phylogenetic groups. We continued our efforts to identify 
new SRP RNAs, compare their sequences, discover new secondary structure 
elements, conserved motifs, and other properties. We found additional proof for 
the variability in the apical loop of helix 8, and we identified several 
bacteria which lack all of their SRP components. Based on the distribution of 
SRP RNA features within the taxonomy, we suggest seven alignment groups: 
Bacteria with a small (4.5S) SRP RNA, Bacteria with a large (6S) SRP RNA, 
Archaea, Fungi (Ascomycota), Metazoa group, Protozoa group, and Plants. The 
proposed divisions improve the prediction of more distantly related SRP RNAs and 
provide a more inclusive representation of the SRP RNA family. Updates of the 
Rfam SRP RNA sequence collection are expected to benefit from the suggested 
groupings.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.6.5.9753
PMID: 19838050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]