---
reference_id: PMID:31665430
title: "ENdb: a manually curated database of experimentally supported enhancers for human and mouse."
authors:
- Bai X
- Shi S
- Ai B
- Jiang Y
- Liu Y
- Han X
- Xu M
- Pan Q
- Wang F
- Wang Q
- Zhang J
- Li X
- Feng C
- Li Y
- Wang Y
- Song Y
- Feng K
- Li C
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz973
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Enhancer Elements, Genetic"
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Mice
- Software
- Software Design
- User-Computer Interface
- Web Browser
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ENdb: a manually curated database of experimentally supported enhancers for human and mouse.
**Authors:** Bai X, Shi S, Ai B, Jiang Y, Liu Y, Han X, Xu M, Pan Q, Wang F, Wang Q, Zhang J, Li X, Feng C, Li Y, Wang Y, Song Y, Feng K, Li C
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkz973](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz973)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Jan 8;48(D1):D51-D57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz973.

ENdb: a manually curated database of experimentally supported enhancers for 
human and mouse.

Bai X(1), Shi S(1), Ai B(1), Jiang Y(1), Liu Y(1), Han X(1), Xu M(1), Pan Q(1), 
Wang F(1), Wang Q(1), Zhang J(1), Li X(1), Feng C(1), Li Y(1), Wang Y(1), Song 
Y(1), Feng K(1), Li C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Informatics, Daqing Campus, Harbin Medical University. 
Daqing 163319, China.

Enhancers are a class of cis-regulatory elements that can increase gene 
transcription by forming loops in intergenic regions, introns and exons. 
Enhancers, as well as their associated target genes, and transcription factors 
(TFs) that bind to them, are highly associated with human disease and biological 
processes. Although some enhancer databases have been published, most only focus 
on enhancers identified by high-throughput experimental techniques. Therefore, 
it is highly desirable to construct a comprehensive resource of manually curated 
enhancers and their related information based on low-throughput experimental 
evidences. Here, we established a comprehensive manually-curated enhancer 
database for human and mouse, which provides a resource for experimentally 
supported enhancers, and to annotate the detailed information of enhancers. The 
current release of ENdb documents 737 experimentally validated enhancers and 
their related information, including 384 target genes, 263 TFs, 110 diseases and 
153 functions in human and mouse. Moreover, the enhancer-related information was 
supported by experimental evidences, such as RNAi, in vitro knockdown, western 
blotting, qRT-PCR, luciferase reporter assay, chromatin conformation capture 
(3C) and chromosome conformation capture-on-chip (4C) assays. ENdb provides a 
user-friendly interface to query, browse and visualize the detailed information 
of enhancers. The database is available at http://www.licpathway.net/ENdb.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz973
PMCID: PMC7145688
PMID: 31665430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]