---
reference_id: PMID:22460905
title: The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity.
authors:
- Barretina J
- Caponigro G
- Stransky N
- Venkatesan K
- Margolin AA
- Kim S
- Wilson CJ
- Lehár J
- Kryukov GV
- Sonkin D
- Reddy A
- Liu M
- Murray L
- Berger MF
- Monahan JE
- Morais P
- Meltzer J
- Korejwa A
- Jané-Valbuena J
- Mapa FA
- Thibault J
- Bric-Furlong E
- Raman P
- Shipway A
- Engels IH
- Cheng J
- Yu GK
- Yu J
- Aspesi P Jr
- de Silva M
- Jagtap K
- Jones MD
- Wang L
- Hatton C
- Palescandolo E
- Gupta S
- Mahan S
- Sougnez C
- Onofrio RC
- Liefeld T
- MacConaill L
- Winckler W
- Reich M
- Li N
- Mesirov JP
- Gabriel SB
- Getz G
- Ardlie K
- Chan V
- Myer VE
- Weber BL
- Porter J
- Warmuth M
- Finan P
- Harris JL
- Meyerson M
- Golub TR
- Morrissey MP
- Sellers WR
- Schlegel R
- Garraway LA
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nature11003
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Lineage
- "Chromosomes, Human/genetics"
- Clinical Trials as Topic/methods
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Drug Screening Assays, Antitumor/methods"
- Encyclopedias as Topic
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Genes, ras/genetics"
- "Genome, Human/genetics"
- Genomics
- Humans
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Pharmacogenetics
- "Plasma Cells/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Precision Medicine/methods
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Aryl Hydrocarbon/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Topoisomerase Inhibitors/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity.
**Authors:** Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehár J, Kryukov GV, Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, Berger MF, Monahan JE, Morais P, Meltzer J, Korejwa A, Jané-Valbuena J, Mapa FA, Thibault J, Bric-Furlong E, Raman P, Shipway A, Engels IH, Cheng J, Yu GK, Yu J, Aspesi P Jr, de Silva M, Jagtap K, Jones MD, Wang L, Hatton C, Palescandolo E, Gupta S, Mahan S, Sougnez C, Onofrio RC, Liefeld T, MacConaill L, Winckler W, Reich M, Li N, Mesirov JP, Gabriel SB, Getz G, Ardlie K, Chan V, Myer VE, Weber BL, Porter J, Warmuth M, Finan P, Harris JL, Meyerson M, Golub TR, Morrissey MP, Sellers WR, Schlegel R, Garraway LA
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature11003](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11003)

## Content

1. Nature. 2012 Mar 28;483(7391):603-7. doi: 10.1038/nature11003.

The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer 
drug sensitivity.

Barretina J(1), Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S, 
Wilson CJ, Lehár J, Kryukov GV, Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, Berger MF, 
Monahan JE, Morais P, Meltzer J, Korejwa A, Jané-Valbuena J, Mapa FA, Thibault 
J, Bric-Furlong E, Raman P, Shipway A, Engels IH, Cheng J, Yu GK, Yu J, Aspesi P 
Jr, de Silva M, Jagtap K, Jones MD, Wang L, Hatton C, Palescandolo E, Gupta S, 
Mahan S, Sougnez C, Onofrio RC, Liefeld T, MacConaill L, Winckler W, Reich M, Li 
N, Mesirov JP, Gabriel SB, Getz G, Ardlie K, Chan V, Myer VE, Weber BL, Porter 
J, Warmuth M, Finan P, Harris JL, Meyerson M, Golub TR, Morrissey MP, Sellers 
WR, Schlegel R, Garraway LA.

Author information:
(1)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2012 Dec 13;492(7428):290.
    Nature. 2019 Jan;565(7738):E5-E6. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0722-x.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 Mar 28;483(7391):544-5. doi: 10.1038/483544a.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Apr 03;9(5):249. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.56.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Apr 18;13(5):300. doi: 10.1038/nrg3221.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Apr 19;12(5):315. doi: 10.1038/nrc3275.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012 Apr 30;11(5):353. doi: 10.1038/nrd3730.

The systematic translation of cancer genomic data into knowledge of tumour 
biology and therapeutic possibilities remains challenging. Such efforts should 
be greatly aided by robust preclinical model systems that reflect the genomic 
diversity of human cancers and for which detailed genetic and pharmacological 
annotation is available. Here we describe the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia 
(CCLE): a compilation of gene expression, chromosomal copy number and massively 
parallel sequencing data from 947 human cancer cell lines. When coupled with 
pharmacological profiles for 24 anticancer drugs across 479 of the cell lines, 
this collection allowed identification of genetic, lineage, and 
gene-expression-based predictors of drug sensitivity. In addition to known 
predictors, we found that plasma cell lineage correlated with sensitivity to 
IGF1 receptor inhibitors; AHR expression was associated with MEK inhibitor 
efficacy in NRAS-mutant lines; and SLFN11 expression predicted sensitivity to 
topoisomerase inhibitors. Together, our results indicate that large, annotated 
cell-line collections may help to enable preclinical stratification schemata for 
anticancer agents. The generation of genetic predictions of drug response in the 
preclinical setting and their incorporation into cancer clinical trial design 
could speed the emergence of 'personalized' therapeutic regimens.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11003
PMCID: PMC3320027
PMID: 22460905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests Multiple authors 
are employees of Novartis, Inc., as noted in the affiliations. T.R.G., M.M., and 
L.A.G. are consultants for and equity holders in Foundation Medicine, Inc. M.M. 
and L.A.G. are consultants for and receive sponsored research from Novartis, 
Inc.