---
reference_id: PMID:33104802
title: "SMART: recent updates, new developments and status in 2020."
authors:
- Letunic I
- Khedkar S
- Bork P
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa937
keywords:
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- Internet
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Phylogeny
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Proteins/chemistry
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMART: recent updates, new developments and status in 2020.
**Authors:** Letunic I, Khedkar S, Bork P
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa937](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa937)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D458-D460. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa937.

SMART: recent updates, new developments and status in 2020.

Letunic I(1), Khedkar S(2), Bork P(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)biobyte solutions GmbH, Bothestr 142, 69126 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.

SMART (Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool) is a web resource 
(https://smart.embl.de) for the identification and annotation of protein domains 
and the analysis of protein domain architectures. SMART version 9 contains 
manually curated models for more than 1300 protein domains, with a topical set 
of 68 new models added since our last update article (1). All the new models are 
for diverse recombinase families and subfamilies and as a set they provide a 
comprehensive overview of mobile element recombinases namely transposase, 
integrase, relaxase, resolvase, cas1 casposase and Xer like cellular 
recombinase. Further updates include the synchronization of the underlying 
protein databases with UniProt (2), Ensembl (3) and STRING (4), greatly 
increasing the total number of annotated domains and other protein features 
available in architecture analysis mode. Furthermore, SMART's vector-based 
protein display engine has been extended and updated to use the latest web 
technologies and the domain architecture analysis components have been optimized 
to handle the increased number of protein features available.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa937
PMCID: PMC7778883
PMID: 33104802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]