---
reference_id: PMID:34634800
title: "DDInter: an online drug-drug interaction database towards improving clinical decision-making and patient safety."
authors:
- Xiong G
- Yang Z
- Yi J
- Wang N
- Wang L
- Zhu H
- Wu C
- Lu A
- Chen X
- Liu S
- Hou T
- Cao D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab880
keywords:
- Clinical Decision-Making
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug Interactions/genetics
- "Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/classification, genetics"
- Humans
- Patient Safety
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DDInter: an online drug-drug interaction database towards improving clinical decision-making and patient safety.
**Authors:** Xiong G, Yang Z, Yi J, Wang N, Wang L, Zhu H, Wu C, Lu A, Chen X, Liu S, Hou T, Cao D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab880](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab880)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D1200-D1207. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab880.

DDInter: an online drug-drug interaction database towards improving clinical 
decision-making and patient safety.

Xiong G(1)(2)(3), Yang Z(2)(3), Yi J(4), Wang N(1), Wang L(2)(3), Zhu H(2)(3), 
Wu C(4), Lu A(5), Chen X(6), Liu S(1), Hou T(7), Cao D(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 
410013, Hunan, China.
(2)Xiangya School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Central South University, Changsha 
410013, Hunan, China.
(3)Hunan Key laboratory of Diagnostic and Therapeutic Drug Research for Chronic 
Diseases, Central South University, Changsha 410013, Hunan, China.
(4)College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 
410073, Hunan, China.
(5)Institute for Advancing Translational Medicine in Bone and Joint Diseases, 
School of Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Hunan Engineering Research Center of Skin Health 
and Disease, Hunan Key Laboratory of Skin Cancer and Psoriasis, Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410008, Hunan, China.
(7)Innovation Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine of Zhejiang 
University, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
310058, Zhejiang, China.

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) can trigger many adverse effects in patients and has 
emerged as a threat to medicine and public health. Despite the continuous 
information accumulation of clinically significant DDIs, there are few 
open-access knowledge systems dedicated to the curation of DDI associations. To 
facilitate the clinicians to screen for dangerous drug combinations and improve 
health systems, we present DDInter, a curated DDI database with comprehensive 
data, practical medication guidance, intuitive function interface, and powerful 
visualization to the scientific community. Currently, DDInter contains about 
0.24M DDI associations connecting 1833 approved drugs (1972 entities). Each drug 
is annotated with basic chemical and pharmacological information and its 
interaction network. For DDI associations, abundant and professional annotations 
are provided, including severity, mechanism description, strategies for managing 
potential side effects, alternative medications, etc. The drug entities and 
interaction entities are efficiently cross-linked. In addition to basic query 
and browsing, the prescription checking function is developed to facilitate 
clinicians to decide whether drugs combinations can be used safely. It can also 
be used for informatics-based DDI investigation and evaluation of other 
prediction frameworks. We hope that DDInter will prove useful in improving 
clinical decision-making and patient safety. DDInter is freely available, 
without registration, at http://ddinter.scbdd.com/.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab880
PMCID: PMC8728114
PMID: 34634800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]