---
reference_id: PMID:37883399
title: Artificial Turf Increases the Physical Demand of Soccer by Heightening Match Running Performance Compared with Natural Grass.
authors:
- Modric T
- Esco M
- Perkovic S
- Basic Z
- Versic S
- Morgans R
- Sekulic D
journal: J Strength Cond Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000004539
keywords:
- Humans
- Soccer
- Athletic Performance
- Running
- Acceleration
- Geographic Information Systems
- Poaceae
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Artificial Turf Increases the Physical Demand of Soccer by Heightening Match Running Performance Compared with Natural Grass.
**Authors:** Modric T, Esco M, Perkovic S, Basic Z, Versic S, Morgans R, Sekulic D
**Journal:** J Strength Cond Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1519/JSC.0000000000004539](https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0000000000004539)

## Content

1. J Strength Cond Res. 2023 Nov 1;37(11):2222-2228. doi: 
10.1519/JSC.0000000000004539.

Artificial Turf Increases the Physical Demand of Soccer by Heightening Match 
Running Performance Compared with Natural Grass.

Modric T(1)(2), Esco M(3), Perkovic S(2), Basic Z(2), Versic S(1)(4), Morgans 
R(5), Sekulic D(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Split, Split, Croatia.
(2)Football Club Riga FC, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
(4)Football Club HNK Hajduk Split, Split, Croatia.
(5)Football Performance Hub, University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, 
United Kingdom; and.
(6)High Performance Sport Center, Croatian Olympic Committee, Zagreb, Croatia.

Modric, T, Esco, M, Perkovic, S, Basic, Z, Versic, S, Morgans, R, and Sekulic, 
D. Artificial turf increases the physical demand of soccer by heightening match 
running performance compared with natural grass. J Strength Cond Res 37(11): 
2222-2228, 2023-This study aimed to determine differences in match running 
performance (MRP) of elite soccer players (n = 31) during matches played on 
artificial turf (AT) and natural grass (NG). The players' MRP (AT; 131 
observations, NG; 135 observations) were collected during official matches (n = 
32) using global positioning system and classified according to their playing 
positions as central defenders, central midfielders, fullbacks, forwards, and 
wingers. The MRP variables included total distance covered (TD), low-intensity 
running (LIR), moderate-intensity running (MIR), high-intensity running (HIR), 
total (Tacc) and high-intensity accelerations (Hacc), and total (Tdec) and 
high-intensity decelerations (Hdec). The influence of match outcome, location, 
and opponent quality was controlled for as contextual factors. Playing matches 
on AT resulted in (a) increased TD (Cohen's d (d) = 0.55, 0.61, and 0.28, 
respectively), MIR (d = 0.91, 0.79, and 0.49, respectively), and HIR (d = 0.67, 
0.44, and 0.38, respectively) for central defenders, central midfielders, 
fullbacks; (b) increased Tacc (d = 0.38, 0.37, and 0.4, respectively) and Tdec 
(d = 0.31, 0.34, and 0.31, respectively) for central defenders, central 
midfielders, and wingers; and (c) decreased Hdec (d = -1.5) for forwards. These 
results show that playing on AT is more physically demanding for defensive and 
midfield players than playing on NG. Soccer coaches should consider implementing 
preparatory strategies that mitigate the increased demands of playing on AT for 
these players, especially before a competitive period when transitions between 
pitch surfaces routinely occur.

Copyright © 2023 National Strength and Conditioning Association.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000004539
PMID: 37883399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]