---
reference_id: PMID:32556148
title: "FOBI: an ontology to represent food intake data and associate it with metabolomic data."
authors:
- Castellano-Escuder P
- González-Domínguez R
- Wishart DS
- Andrés-Lacueva C
- Sánchez-Pla A
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/databa/baaa033
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Biomarkers
- Eating
- Food
- Humans
- Internet
- Metabolome
- Metabolomics
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FOBI: an ontology to represent food intake data and associate it with metabolomic data.
**Authors:** Castellano-Escuder P, González-Domínguez R, Wishart DS, Andrés-Lacueva C, Sánchez-Pla A
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/databa/baaa033](https://doi.org/10.1093/databa/baaa033)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2020 Jan 1;2020:baaa033. doi: 10.1093/databa/baaa033.

FOBI: an ontology to represent food intake data and associate it with 
metabolomic data.

Castellano-Escuder P(1)(2)(3), González-Domínguez R(1)(3), Wishart DS(4), 
Andrés-Lacueva C(1)(3), Sánchez-Pla A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biomarkers and Nutritional & Food Metabolomics Research Group, Department of 
Nutrition, Food Science and Gastronomy, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Statistics and Bioinformatics Research Group, Department of Genetics, 
Microbiology and Statistics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)CIBERFES, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 
2E8, Canada.

Nutrition research can be conducted by using two complementary approaches: (i) 
traditional self-reporting methods or (ii) via metabolomics techniques to 
analyze food intake biomarkers in biofluids. However, the complexity and 
heterogeneity of these two very different types of data often hinder their 
analysis and integration. To manage this challenge, we have developed a novel 
ontology that describes food and their associated metabolite entities in a 
hierarchical way. This ontology uses a formal naming system, category 
definitions, properties and relations between both types of data. The ontology 
presented is called FOBI (Food-Biomarker Ontology) and it is composed of two 
interconnected sub-ontologies. One is a 'Food Ontology' consisting of raw foods 
and 'multi-component foods' while the second is a 'Biomarker Ontology' 
containing food intake biomarkers classified by their chemical classes. These 
two sub-ontologies are conceptually independent but interconnected by different 
properties. This allows data and information regarding foods and food biomarkers 
to be visualized in a bidirectional way, going from metabolomics to nutritional 
data or vice versa. Potential applications of this ontology include the 
annotation of foods and biomarkers using a well-defined and consistent 
nomenclature, the standardized reporting of metabolomics workflows (e.g. 
metabolite identification, experimental design) or the application of different 
enrichment analysis approaches to analyze nutrimetabolomic data. Availability: 
FOBI is freely available in both OWL (Web Ontology Language) and OBO (Open 
Biomedical Ontologies) formats at the project's Github repository 
(https://github.com/pcastellanoescuder/FoodBiomarkerOntology) and FOBI 
visualization tool is available in 
https://polcastellano.shinyapps.io/FOBI_Visualization_Tool/.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/databa/baaa033
PMCID: PMC7298227
PMID: 32556148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]