---
reference_id: PMID:34788826
title: "PHI-base in 2022: a multi-species phenotype database for Pathogen-Host Interactions."
authors:
- Urban M
- Cuzick A
- Seager J
- Wood V
- Rutherford K
- Venkatesh SY
- Sahu J
- Iyer SV
- Khamari L
- De Silva N
- Martinez MC
- Pedro H
- Yates AD
- Hammond-Kosack KE
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1037
keywords:
- Animals
- "Apicomplexa/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Bacteria/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Diplomonadida/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- "Fungi/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions/genetics
- "Insecta/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- Internet
- "Nematoda/classification, genetics, pathogenicity"
- Phenotype
- Phylogeny
- "Plants/microbiology, parasitology"
- User-Computer Interface
- Virulence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PHI-base in 2022: a multi-species phenotype database for Pathogen-Host Interactions.
**Authors:** Urban M, Cuzick A, Seager J, Wood V, Rutherford K, Venkatesh SY, Sahu J, Iyer SV, Khamari L, De Silva N, Martinez MC, Pedro H, Yates AD, Hammond-Kosack KE
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab1037](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1037)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D837-D847. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1037.

PHI-base in 2022: a multi-species phenotype database for Pathogen-Host 
Interactions.

Urban M(1), Cuzick A(1), Seager J(1), Wood V(2), Rutherford K(2), Venkatesh 
SY(3), Sahu J(3), Iyer SV(3), Khamari L(3), De Silva N(4), Martinez MC(4), Pedro 
H(4), Yates AD(4), Hammond-Kosack KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biointeractions and Crop Protection, Rothamsted Research, 
Harpenden AL5 2JQ, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.
(3)Molecular Connections, Kandala Mansions, Kariappa Road, Basavanagudi, 
Bengaluru 560 004, India.
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.

Since 2005, the Pathogen-Host Interactions Database (PHI-base) has manually 
curated experimentally verified pathogenicity, virulence and effector genes from 
fungal, bacterial and protist pathogens, which infect animal, plant, fish, 
insect and/or fungal hosts. PHI-base (www.phi-base.org) is devoted to the 
identification and presentation of phenotype information on pathogenicity and 
effector genes and their host interactions. Specific gene alterations that did 
not alter the in host interaction phenotype are also presented. PHI-base is 
invaluable for comparative analyses and for the discovery of candidate targets 
in medically and agronomically important species for intervention. Version 4.12 
(September 2021) contains 4387 references, and provides information on 8411 
genes from 279 pathogens, tested on 228 hosts in 18, 190 interactions. This 
provides a 24% increase in gene content since Version 4.8 (September 2019). 
Bacterial and fungal pathogens represent the majority of the interaction data, 
with a 54:46 split of entries, whilst protists, protozoa, nematodes and insects 
represent 3.6% of entries. Host species consist of approximately 54% plants and 
46% others of medical, veterinary and/or environmental importance. PHI-base data 
is disseminated to UniProtKB, FungiDB and Ensembl Genomes. PHI-base will migrate 
to a new gene-centric version (version 5.0) in early 2022. This major 
development is briefly described.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1037
PMCID: PMC8728202
PMID: 34788826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]