---
reference_id: PMID:25616435
title: Types and effects of protein variations.
authors:
- Vihinen M
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1529-6
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence/genetics
- Animals
- "Databases, Protein"
- Gene Ontology
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Protein Folding
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational/genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary/genetics"
- "Protein Structure, Secondary/genetics"
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Types and effects of protein variations.
**Authors:** Vihinen M
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-015-1529-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-015-1529-6)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2015 Apr;134(4):405-21. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1529-6. Epub 2015
Jan  24.

Types and effects of protein variations.

Vihinen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, BMC D10, 
SE-22184, Lund, Sweden, mauno.vihinen@med.lu.se.

Variations in proteins have very large number of diverse effects affecting 
sequence, structure, stability, interactions, activity, abundance and other 
properties. Although protein-coding exons cover just over 1 % of the human 
genome they harbor an disproportionately large portion of disease-causing 
variants. Variation ontology (VariO) has been developed for annotation and 
description of variation effects, mechanisms and consequences. A holistic view 
for variations in proteins is made available along with examples of real cases. 
Protein variants can be of genetic origin or emerge at protein level. Systematic 
names are provided for all variation types, a more detailed description can be 
made by explaining changes to protein function, structure and properties. 
Examples are provided for the effects and mechanisms, usually in relation to 
human diseases. In addition, the examples are selected so that protein 3D 
structural changes, when relevant, are included and visualized. Here, 
systematics is described for protein variants based on VariO. It will benefit 
the unequivocal description of variations and their effects and further reuse 
and integration of data from different sources.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-015-1529-6
PMID: 25616435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]