---
reference_id: PMID:29087512
title: 'TRRUST v2: an expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional regulatory interactions.'
authors:
- Han H
- Cho JW
- Lee S
- Yun A
- Kim H
- Bae D
- Yang S
- Kim CY
- Lee M
- Kim E
- Lee S
- Kang B
- Jeong D
- Kim Y
- Jeon HN
- Jung H
- Nam S
- Chung M
- Kim JH
- Lee I
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TRRUST v2: an expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional regulatory interactions.
**Authors:** Han H, Cho JW, Lee S, Yun A, Kim H, Bae D, Yang S, Kim CY, Lee M, Kim E, Lee S, Kang B, Jeong D, Kim Y, Jeon HN, Jung H, Nam S, Chung M, Kim JH, Lee I
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkx1013](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1013)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jan 4;46(D1):D380-D386. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1013.

TRRUST v2: an expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional
regulatory interactions.

Han H, Cho JW, Lee S, Yun A, Kim H, Bae D, Yang S, Kim CY, Lee M, Kim E, Lee S,
Kang B, Jeong D, Kim Y, Jeon HN, Jung H, Nam S, Chung M, Kim JH, Lee I.

Transcription factors (TFs) are major trans-acting factors in transcriptional
regulation. Therefore, elucidating TF-target interactions is a key step toward
understanding the regulatory circuitry underlying complex traits such as human
diseases. We previously published a reference TF-target interaction database for
humans-TRRUST (Transcriptional Regulatory Relationships Unraveled by
Sentence-based Text mining)-which was constructed using sentence-based text
mining, followed by manual curation. Here, we present TRRUST v2
(www.grnpedia.org/trrust) with a significant improvement from the previous
version, including a significantly increased size of the database consisting of
8444 regulatory interactions for 800 TFs in humans. More importantly, TRRUST v2
also contains a database for TF-target interactions in mice, including 6552
TF-target interactions for 828 mouse TFs. TRRUST v2 is also substantially more
comprehensive and less biased than other TF-target interaction databases. We
also improved the web interface, which now enables prioritization of key TFs for
a physiological condition depicted by a set of user-input transcriptional
responsive genes. With the significant expansion in the database size and
inclusion of the new web tool for TF prioritization, we believe that TRRUST v2
will be a versatile database for the study of the transcriptional regulation
involved in human diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1013
PMCID: PMC5753191
PMID: 29087512
