---
reference_id: PMID:33211880
title: "BRENDA, the ELIXIR core data resource in 2021: new developments and updates."
authors:
- Chang A
- Jeske L
- Ulbrich S
- Hofmann J
- Koblitz J
- Schomburg I
- Neumann-Schaal M
- Jahn D
- Schomburg D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1025
keywords:
- Acetyl Coenzyme A/biosynthesis
- Arabidopsis/enzymology
- Bacillus subtilis/enzymology
- "Databases, Protein"
- Enzymes/chemistry
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Search Engine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRENDA, the ELIXIR core data resource in 2021: new developments and updates.
**Authors:** Chang A, Jeske L, Ulbrich S, Hofmann J, Koblitz J, Schomburg I, Neumann-Schaal M, Jahn D, Schomburg D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa1025](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1025)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D498-D508. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1025.

BRENDA, the ELIXIR core data resource in 2021: new developments and updates.

Chang A(1), Jeske L(1), Ulbrich S(1), Hofmann J(1), Koblitz J(2), Schomburg 
I(1), Neumann-Schaal M(2), Jahn D(1), Schomburg D(1).

Author information:
(1)Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig Integrated Centre of 
Systems Biology (BRICS), Rebenring 56, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Inhoffenstrasse 7 B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

The BRENDA enzyme database (https://www.brenda-enzymes.org), established in 
1987, has evolved into the main collection of functional enzyme and metabolism 
data. In 2018, BRENDA was selected as an ELIXIR Core Data Resource. BRENDA 
provides reliable data, continuous curation and updates of classified enzymes, 
and the integration of newly discovered enzymes. The main part contains >5 
million data for ∼90 000 enzymes from ∼13 000 organisms, manually extracted from 
∼157 000 primary literature references, combined with information of text and 
data mining, data integration, and prediction algorithms. Supplements comprise 
disease-related data, protein sequences, 3D structures, genome annotations, 
ligand information, taxonomic, bibliographic, and kinetic data. BRENDA offers an 
easy access to enzyme information from quick to advanced searches, text- and 
structured-based queries for enzyme-ligand interactions, word maps, and 
visualization of enzyme data. The BRENDA Pathway Maps are completely revised and 
updated for an enhanced interactive and intuitive usability. The new design of 
the Enzyme Summary Page provides an improved access to each individual enzyme. A 
new protein structure 3D viewer was integrated. The prediction of the 
intracellular localization of eukaryotic enzymes has been implemented. The new 
EnzymeDetector combines BRENDA enzyme annotations with protein and genome 
databases for the detection of eukaryotic and prokaryotic enzymes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1025
PMCID: PMC7779020
PMID: 33211880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]