---
reference_id: PMID:40799495
title: "Next generation biobanking ontology: introducing-omics contextual data to biobanking ontology."
authors:
- Alghamdi D
- Dooley DM
- Samman M
- AlFaiz A
- Hsiao WWL
journal: Bioinform Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/bioadv/vbaf131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Next generation biobanking ontology: introducing-omics contextual data to biobanking ontology.
**Authors:** Alghamdi D, Dooley DM, Samman M, AlFaiz A, Hsiao WWL
**Journal:** Bioinform Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioadv/vbaf131](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioadv/vbaf131)

## Content

1. Bioinform Adv. 2025 Aug 7;5(1):vbaf131. doi: 10.1093/bioadv/vbaf131.
eCollection  2025.

Next generation biobanking ontology: introducing-omics contextual data to 
biobanking ontology.

Alghamdi D(1)(2)(3), Dooley DM(2), Samman M(4), AlFaiz A(3), Hsiao WWL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, University of British Columbia, Genome 
Sciences Centre, BC Cancer, Vancouver, BC V5T 4S6, Canada.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Genomics and One Health (CIDGOH), Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada.
(3)Executive Administration of Research Center, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh 
12231, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Clinical Pathology Department, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh 12231, Saudi 
Arabia.

MOTIVATION: With improvements in high throughput sequencing technologies and the 
constant generation of large biomedical datasets, biobanks increasingly take on 
the role of managing and delivering not just specimens but also specimen-derived 
data and associated contextual data. However, reusing data from different 
biobanks is challenged by incompatible data representations. Contextual data 
describing biobank resources often contains unstructured textual information 
incompatible with computational processes such as automated data discovery and 
integration. Therefore, a consistent and comprehensive contextual data framework 
is needed to increase discovery, reusability, and integrability across data 
sources.
RESULTS: The next generation biobanking ontology is an open-source application 
ontology representing omics contextual data, licensed under the Creative Commons 
4.0 license. The ontology focuses on capturing information about three main 
activities: wet bench analysis used to generate omics data, bioinformatics 
analysis used to process and interpret data, and data management. In this paper, 
we demonstrated the use of the ontology to add semantic statements to real-life 
use cases and query data previously stored in unstructured textual format.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: NGBO is freely available at 
https://github.com/Dalalghamdi/NGBO, and accessible from OLS 
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/ngbo.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioadv/vbaf131
PMCID: PMC12342351
PMID: 40799495

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.