---
reference_id: PMID:16043635
title: 'MAO: a Multiple Alignment Ontology for nucleic acid and protein sequences.'
authors:
- Thompson JD
- Holbrook SR
- Katoh K
- Koehl P
- Moras D
- Westhof E
- Poch O
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gki735
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MAO: a Multiple Alignment Ontology for nucleic acid and protein sequences.
**Authors:** Thompson JD, Holbrook SR, Katoh K, Koehl P, Moras D, Westhof E, Poch O
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gki735](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gki735)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul 25;33(13):4164-71. doi: 10.1093/nar/gki735. Print 2005.

MAO: a Multiple Alignment Ontology for nucleic acid and protein sequences.

Thompson JD, Holbrook SR, Katoh K, Koehl P, Moras D, Westhof E, Poch O.

The application of high-throughput techniques such as genomics, proteomics or
transcriptomics means that vast amounts of heterogeneous data are now available
in the public databases. Bioinformatics is responding to the challenge with new
integrated management systems for data collection, validation and analysis.
Multiple alignments of genomic and protein sequences provide an ideal
environment for the integration of this mass of information. In the context of
the sequence family, structural and functional data can be evaluated and
propagated from known to unknown sequences. However, effective integration is
being hindered by syntactic and semantic differences between the different data
resources and the alignment techniques employed. One solution to this problem is
the development of an ontology that systematically defines the terms used in a
specific domain. Ontologies are used to share data from different resources, to
automatically analyse information and to represent domain knowledge for
non-experts. Here, we present MAO, a new ontology for multiple alignments of
nucleic and protein sequences. MAO is designed to improve interoperation and
data sharing between different alignment protocols for the construction of a
high quality, reliable multiple alignment in order to facilitate knowledge
extraction and the presentation of the most pertinent information to the
biologist.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki735
PMCID: PMC1180671
PMID: 16043635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
