---
reference_id: PMID:22973865
title: A new ontology (structured hierarchy) of human developmental anatomy for the first 7 weeks (Carnegie stages 1-20).
authors:
- Bard J
journal: J Anat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2012.01566.x
keywords:
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Embryo, Mammalian/anatomy & histology"
- Fetal Development
- Humans/embryology
- Internet
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new ontology (structured hierarchy) of human developmental anatomy for the first 7 weeks (Carnegie stages 1-20).
**Authors:** Bard J
**Journal:** J Anat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-7580.2012.01566.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7580.2012.01566.x)

## Content

1. J Anat. 2012 Nov;221(5):406-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2012.01566.x. Epub
2012  Sep 14.

A new ontology (structured hierarchy) of human developmental anatomy for the 
first 7 weeks (Carnegie stages 1-20).

Bard J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. j.bard@ed.ac.uk

This paper describes a new ontology of human developmental anatomy covering the 
first 49 days [Carnegie stages (CS)1-20], primarily structured around the parts 
of organ systems and their development. The ontology includes more than 2000 
anatomical entities (AEs) that range from the whole embryo, through organ 
systems and organ parts down to simple or leaf tissues (groups of cells with the 
same morphological phenotype), as well as features such as cavities. Each AE has 
assigned to it a set of facts of the form <AE><relationship><parent>, with the 
relationships including starts_at and ends_at (CSs), part_of (there can be 
several parents) and is_a (this gives the type of tissue, from an organ system 
down to one of ~ 80 simple tissues predominantly composed of a single cell kind, 
which is also specified). Leaf tissues also have a develops_from link to its 
parent tissue. The ontology includes ~14 000 such facts, which are mainly from 
the literature and an earlier ontology of human developmental anatomy (EHDAA, 
now withdrawn). The relationships enable these facts to be integrated into a 
single, complex hierarchy (or mathematical graph) that was made and can be 
viewed in the OBO-Edit browser (oboedit.org). Each AE has an EHDAA2 ID that may 
be useful in an informatics context, while the ontology as a whole can be used 
for organizing databases of human development. It is also a knowledge resource: 
a user can trace the lineage of any tissue back to the egg, study the changes in 
cell phenotype that occur as a tissue develops, and use the structure to add 
further (e.g. molecular) information. The ontology may be downloaded from 
www.obofoundry.org. Queries and corrections should be sent to j.bard@ed.ac.uk.

© 2012 The Author Journal of Anatomy © 2012 Anatomical Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2012.01566.x
PMCID: PMC3482348
PMID: 22973865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]