---
reference_id: PMID:34648031
title: "NCATS Inxight Drugs: a comprehensive and curated portal for translational research."
authors:
- Siramshetty VB
- Grishagin I
- Nguyễn ÐT
- Peryea T
- Skovpen Y
- Stroganov O
- Katzel D
- Sheils T
- Jadhav A
- Mathé EA
- Southall NT
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab918
keywords:
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Databases, Pharmaceutical"
- Humans
- National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (U.S.)
- Pharmaceutical Preparations/classification
- "Translational Research, Biomedical/classification"
- United States
- United States Food and Drug Administration
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NCATS Inxight Drugs: a comprehensive and curated portal for translational research.
**Authors:** Siramshetty VB, Grishagin I, Nguyễn ÐT, Peryea T, Skovpen Y, Stroganov O, Katzel D, Sheils T, Jadhav A, Mathé EA, Southall NT
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab918](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab918)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D1307-D1316. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab918.

NCATS Inxight Drugs: a comprehensive and curated portal for translational 
research.

Siramshetty VB(1), Grishagin I(1), Nguyễn ÐT(1), Peryea T(1), Skovpen Y(2), 
Stroganov O(2), Katzel D(1), Sheils T(1), Jadhav A(1), Mathé EA(1), Southall 
NT(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of 
Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(2)Rancho BioSciences, San Diego, CA, USA.

The United States has a complex regulatory scheme for marketing drugs. 
Understanding drug regulatory status is a daunting task that requires 
integrating data from many sources from the United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), US government publications, and other processes related to 
drug development. At NCATS, we created Inxight Drugs (https://drugs.ncats.io), a 
web resource that attempts to address this challenge in a systematic manner. 
NCATS Inxight Drugs incorporates and unifies a wealth of data, including those 
supplied by the FDA and from independent public sources. The database offers a 
substantial amount of manually curated literature data unavailable from other 
sources. Currently, the database contains 125 036 product ingredients, including 
2566 US approved drugs, 6242 marketed drugs, and 9684 investigational drugs. All 
substances are rigorously defined according to the ISO 11238 standard to comply 
with existing regulatory standards for unique drug substance identification. A 
special emphasis was placed on capturing manually curated and referenced data on 
treatment modalities and semantic relationships between substances. A 
supplementary resource 'Novel FDA Drug Approvals' features regulatory details of 
newly approved FDA drugs. The database is regularly updated using NCATS Stitcher 
data integration tool that automates data aggregation and supports full data 
access through a RESTful API.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab918
PMCID: PMC8728186
PMID: 34648031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]