---
reference_id: PMID:22102589
title: "UniPathway: a resource for the exploration and annotation of metabolic pathways."
authors:
- Morgat A
- Coissac E
- Coudert E
- Axelsen KB
- Keller G
- Bairoch A
- Bridge A
- Bougueleret L
- Xenarios I
- Viari A
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1023
keywords:
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Databases, Protein"
- Enzymes/metabolism
- Lysine/biosynthesis
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# UniPathway: a resource for the exploration and annotation of metabolic pathways.
**Authors:** Morgat A, Coissac E, Coudert E, Axelsen KB, Keller G, Bairoch A, Bridge A, Bougueleret L, Xenarios I, Viari A
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkr1023](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr1023)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(Database issue):D761-9. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkr1023.  Epub 2011 Nov 18.

UniPathway: a resource for the exploration and annotation of metabolic pathways.

Morgat A(1), Coissac E, Coudert E, Axelsen KB, Keller G, Bairoch A, Bridge A, 
Bougueleret L, Xenarios I, Viari A.

Author information:
(1)Swiss-Prot Group, SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, CMU, 1 rue 
Michel-Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. anne.morgat@isb-sib.ch

UniPathway (http://www.unipathway.org) is a fully manually curated resource for 
the representation and annotation of metabolic pathways. UniPathway provides 
explicit representations of enzyme-catalyzed and spontaneous chemical reactions, 
as well as a hierarchical representation of metabolic pathways. This hierarchy 
uses linear subpathways as the basic building block for the assembly of larger 
and more complex pathways, including species-specific pathway variants. All of 
the pathway data in UniPathway has been extensively cross-linked to existing 
pathway resources such as KEGG and MetaCyc, as well as sequence resources such 
as the UniProt KnowledgeBase (UniProtKB), for which UniPathway provides a 
controlled vocabulary for pathway annotation. We introduce here the basic 
concepts underlying the UniPathway resource, with the aim of allowing users to 
fully exploit the information provided by UniPathway.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr1023
PMCID: PMC3245108
PMID: 22102589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]