---
reference_id: PMID:25858286
title: "miRGate: a curated database of human, mouse and rat miRNA-mRNA targets."
authors:
- Andrés-León E
- González Peña D
- Gómez-López G
- Pisano DG
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/database/bav035
keywords:
- "3' Untranslated Regions"
- Animals
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Humans
- Mice
- "MicroRNAs/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA, Viral/genetics, metabolism"
- Rats
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- "Viruses/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# miRGate: a curated database of human, mouse and rat miRNA-mRNA targets.
**Authors:** Andrés-León E, González Peña D, Gómez-López G, Pisano DG
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bav035](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bav035)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2015 Apr 8;2015:bav035. doi: 10.1093/database/bav035. Print
 2015.

miRGate: a curated database of human, mouse and rat miRNA-mRNA targets.

Andrés-León E(1), González Peña D(2), Gómez-López G(2), Pisano DG(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Unit (UBio), Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, 
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain and High Technical 
School of Computer Engineering, University of Vigo, Ourense, Spain 
eleon-ibis@us.es.
(2)Bioinformatics Unit (UBio), Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, 
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain and High Technical 
School of Computer Engineering, University of Vigo, Ourense, Spain.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding elements involved in the 
post-transcriptional down-regulation of gene expression through base pairing 
with messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Through this mechanism, several miRNA-mRNA pairs 
have been described as critical in the regulation of multiple cellular 
processes, including early embryonic development and pathological conditions. 
Many of these pairs (such as miR-15 b/BCL2 in apoptosis or BART-6/BCL6 in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas) were experimentally discovered and/or 
computationally predicted. Available tools for target prediction are usually 
based on sequence matching, thermodynamics and conservation, among other 
approaches. Nevertheless, the main issue on miRNA-mRNA pair prediction is the 
little overlapping results among different prediction methods, or even with 
experimentally validated pairs lists, despite the fact that all rely on similar 
principles. To circumvent this problem, we have developed miRGate, a database 
containing novel computational predicted miRNA-mRNA pairs that are calculated 
using well-established algorithms. In addition, it includes an updated and 
complete dataset of sequences for both miRNA and mRNAs 3'-Untranslated region 
from human (including human viruses), mouse and rat, as well as experimentally 
validated data from four well-known databases. The underlying methodology of 
miRGate has been successfully applied to independent datasets providing 
predictions that were convincingly validated by functional assays. miRGate is an 
open resource available at http://mirgate.bioinfo.cnio.es. For programmatic 
access, we have provided a representational state transfer web service 
application programming interface that allows accessing the database at 
http://mirgate.bioinfo.cnio.es/API/ Database URL: http://mirgate.bioinfo.cnio.es

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bav035
PMCID: PMC4390609
PMID: 25858286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]