---
reference_id: PMID:29447345
title: The BioCyc collection of microbial genomes and metabolic pathways.
authors:
- Karp PD
- Billington R
- Caspi R
- Fulcher CA
- Latendresse M
- Kothari A
- Keseler IM
- Krummenacker M
- Midford PE
- Ong Q
- Ong WK
- Paley SM
- Subhraveti P
journal: Brief Bioinform
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx085
keywords:
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Escherichia coli/genetics, metabolism"
- "Genome, Microbial"
- Genomics
- Internet
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- "Models, Biological"
- Search Engine
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The BioCyc collection of microbial genomes and metabolic pathways.
**Authors:** Karp PD, Billington R, Caspi R, Fulcher CA, Latendresse M, Kothari A, Keseler IM, Krummenacker M, Midford PE, Ong Q, Ong WK, Paley SM, Subhraveti P
**Journal:** Brief Bioinform (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bib/bbx085](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbx085)

## Content

1. Brief Bioinform. 2019 Jul 19;20(4):1085-1093. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx085.

The BioCyc collection of microbial genomes and metabolic pathways.

Karp PD(1), Billington R(2), Caspi R(2), Fulcher CA(2), Latendresse M(2), 
Kothari A(2), Keseler IM(2), Krummenacker M(2), Midford PE(2), Ong Q(2), Ong 
WK(2), Paley SM(2), Subhraveti P(2).

Author information:
(1)SRI Bioinformatics Research Group (BRG).
(2)SRI International.

BioCyc.org is a microbial genome Web portal that combines thousands of genomes 
with additional information inferred by computer programs, imported from other 
databases and curated from the biomedical literature by biologist curators. 
BioCyc also provides an extensive range of query tools, visualization services 
and analysis software. Recent advances in BioCyc include an expansion in the 
content of BioCyc in terms of both the number of genomes and the types of 
information available for each genome; an expansion in the amount of curated 
content within BioCyc; and new developments in the BioCyc software tools 
including redesigned gene/protein pages and metabolite pages; new search tools; 
a new sequence-alignment tool; a new tool for visualizing groups of related 
metabolic pathways; and a facility called SmartTables, which enables biologists 
to perform analyses that previously would have required a programmer's 
assistance.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbx085
PMCID: PMC6781571
PMID: 29447345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]