---
reference_id: PMID:22402613
title: A strategy for building neuroanatomy ontologies.
authors:
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Reeve S
- Mungall CJ
- Neuhaus F
- Ruttenberg A
- Jefferis GS
- Armstrong JD
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts113
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arthropod Antennae/anatomy & histology"
- "Brain/anatomy & histology"
- "Drosophila/anatomy & histology"
- Internet
- "Nervous System/anatomy & histology"
- Neuroanatomy/methods
- "Neurons/classification, cytology"
- Software
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A strategy for building neuroanatomy ontologies.
**Authors:** Osumi-Sutherland D, Reeve S, Mungall CJ, Neuhaus F, Ruttenberg A, Jefferis GS, Armstrong JD
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/bts113](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts113)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2012 May 1;28(9):1262-9. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts113. 
Epub 2012 Mar 7.

A strategy for building neuroanatomy ontologies.

Osumi-Sutherland D(1), Reeve S, Mungall CJ, Neuhaus F, Ruttenberg A, Jefferis 
GS, Armstrong JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Erratum in
    Bioinformatics. 2012 Aug 1;28(15):2091.

MOTIVATION: Advancing our understanding of how nervous systems work will require 
the ability to store and annotate 3D anatomical datasets, recording morphology, 
partonomy and connectivity at multiple levels of granularity from subcellular to 
gross anatomy. It will also require the ability to integrate this data with 
other data-types including functional, genetic and electrophysiological data. 
The web ontology language OWL2 provides the means to solve many of these 
problems. Using it, one can rigorously define and relate classes of anatomical 
structure using multiple criteria. The resulting classes can be used to annotate 
datasets recording, for example, gene expression or electrophysiology. Reasoning 
software can be used to automate classification and error checking and to 
construct and answer sophisticated combinatorial queries. But for such queries 
to give consistent and biologically meaningful results, it is important that 
both classes and the terms (relations) used to relate them are carefully 
defined.
RESULTS: We formally define a set of relations for recording the spatial and 
connectivity relationships of neuron classes and brain regions in a broad range 
of species, from vertebrates to arthropods. We illustrate the utility of our 
approach via its application in the ontology that drives the Virtual Fly Brain 
web resource.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The relations we define are available from 
http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ro.owl. They are used in the Drosophila anatomy 
ontology (http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/fbbt/2011-09-06/), which drives the web 
resource http://www.virtualflybrain.org

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts113
PMID: 22402613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]