---
reference_id: PMID:32109232
title: Semantic concept schema of the linear mixed model of experimental observations.
authors:
- Ćwiek-Kupczyńska H
- Filipiak K
- Markiewicz A
- Rocca-Serra P
- Gonzalez-Beltran AN
- Sansone SA
- Millet EJ
- van Eeuwijk F
- Ławrynowicz A
- Krajewski P
journal: Sci Data
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41597-020-0409-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Semantic concept schema of the linear mixed model of experimental observations.
**Authors:** Ćwiek-Kupczyńska H, Filipiak K, Markiewicz A, Rocca-Serra P, Gonzalez-Beltran AN, Sansone SA, Millet EJ, van Eeuwijk F, Ławrynowicz A, Krajewski P
**Journal:** Sci Data (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41597-020-0409-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0409-7)

## Content

1. Sci Data. 2020 Feb 27;7(1):70. doi: 10.1038/s41597-020-0409-7.

Semantic concept schema of the linear mixed model of experimental observations.

Ćwiek-Kupczyńska H(1), Filipiak K(2), Markiewicz A(3), Rocca-Serra P(4), 
Gonzalez-Beltran AN(4)(5), Sansone SA(4), Millet EJ(6), van Eeuwijk F(6), 
Ławrynowicz A(7), Krajewski P(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Strzeszyńska 34, 
60-479, Poznań, Poland.
(2)Institute of Mathematics, Poznań University of Technology, ul. Piotrowo 3a, 
60-965, Poznań, Poland.
(3)Department of Mathematical and Statistical Methods, Poznań University of Life 
Sciences, ul. Wojska Polskiego 28, 60-637, Poznań, Poland.
(4)Oxford e-Research Center, Department of Engineering Science, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QG, UK.
(5)Scientific Computing Department, Science and Technology Facilities Council, 
UK Research & Innovation, Didcot, OX11 0QX, UK.
(6)Biometris, Wageningen University & Research Centre, P.O. Box 16, 6700 AA, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Faculty of Computing and Telecommunications, Poznan University of Technology, 
ul. Piotrowo 3, 60-965, Poznań, Poland.
(8)Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Strzeszyńska 34, 
60-479, Poznań, Poland. pkra@igr.poznan.pl.

In the information age, smart data modelling and data management can be carried 
out to address the wealth of data produced in scientific experiments. In this 
paper, we propose a semantic model for the statistical analysis of datasets by 
linear mixed models. We tie together disparate statistical concepts in an 
interdisciplinary context through the application of ontologies, in particular 
the Statistics Ontology (STATO), to produce FAIR data summaries. We hope to 
improve the general understanding of statistical modelling and thus contribute 
to a better description of the statistical conclusions from data analysis, 
allowing their efficient exploration and automated processing.

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-020-0409-7
PMCID: PMC7046786
PMID: 32109232

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.