---
reference_id: PMID:21030441
title: "The BRENDA Tissue Ontology (BTO): the first all-integrating ontology of all organisms for enzyme sources."
authors:
- Gremse M
- Chang A
- Schomburg I
- Grote A
- Scheer M
- Ebeling C
- Schomburg D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq968
keywords:
- Cell Line
- "Cells/classification, enzymology"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Dictionaries as Topic
- Enzymes
- Systems Integration
- User-Computer Interface
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The BRENDA Tissue Ontology (BTO): the first all-integrating ontology of all organisms for enzyme sources.
**Authors:** Gremse M, Chang A, Schomburg I, Grote A, Scheer M, Ebeling C, Schomburg D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkq968](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq968)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(Database issue):D507-13. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkq968.  Epub 2010 Oct 28.

The BRENDA Tissue Ontology (BTO): the first all-integrating ontology of all 
organisms for enzyme sources.

Gremse M(1), Chang A, Schomburg I, Grote A, Scheer M, Ebeling C, Schomburg D.

Author information:
(1)Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institute for Bioinformatics and 
Biochemistry, Langer Kamp 19 B, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

BTO, the BRENDA Tissue Ontology (http://www.BTO.brenda-enzymes.org) represents a 
comprehensive structured encyclopedia of tissue terms. The project started in 
2003 to create a connection between the enzyme data collection of the BRENDA 
enzyme database and a structured network of source tissues and cell types. 
Currently, BTO contains more than 4600 different anatomical structures, tissues, 
cell types and cell lines, classified under generic categories corresponding to 
the rules and formats of the Gene Ontology Consortium and organized as a 
directed acyclic graph (DAG). Most of the terms are endowed with comments on 
their derivation or definitions. The content of the ontology is constantly 
curated with ∼1000 new terms each year. Four different types of relationships 
between the terms are implemented. A versatile web interface with several search 
and navigation functionalities allows convenient online access to the BTO and to 
the enzymes isolated from the tissues. Important areas of applications of the 
BTO terms are the detection of enzymes in tissues and the provision of a solid 
basis for text-mining approaches in this field. It is widely used by lab 
scientists, curators of genomic and biochemical databases and bioinformaticians. 
The BTO is freely available at http://www.obofoundry.org.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq968
PMCID: PMC3013802
PMID: 21030441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]