---
reference_id: PMID:17135203
title: "MINT: the Molecular INTeraction database."
authors:
- Chatr-aryamontri A
- Ceol A
- Palazzi LM
- Nardelli G
- Schneider MV
- Castagnoli L
- Cesareni G
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkl950
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- Internet
- Multiprotein Complexes/chemistry
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MINT: the Molecular INTeraction database.
**Authors:** Chatr-aryamontri A, Ceol A, Palazzi LM, Nardelli G, Schneider MV, Castagnoli L, Cesareni G
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkl950](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkl950)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007 Jan;35(Database issue):D572-4. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkl950.  Epub 2006 Nov 29.

MINT: the Molecular INTeraction database.

Chatr-aryamontri A(1), Ceol A, Palazzi LM, Nardelli G, Schneider MV, Castagnoli 
L, Cesareni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca 
Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy.

The Molecular INTeraction database (MINT, http://mint.bio.uniroma2.it/mint/) 
aims at storing, in a structured format, information about molecular 
interactions (MIs) by extracting experimental details from work published in 
peer-reviewed journals. At present the MINT team focuses the curation work on 
physical interactions between proteins. Genetic or computationally inferred 
interactions are not included in the database. Over the past four years MINT has 
undergone extensive revision. The new version of MINT is based on a completely 
remodeled database structure, which offers more efficient data exploration and 
analysis, and is characterized by entries with a richer annotation. Over the 
past few years the number of curated physical interactions has soared to over 95 
000. The whole dataset can be freely accessed online in both interactive and 
batch modes through web-based interfaces and an FTP server. MINT now includes, 
as an integrated addition, HomoMINT, a database of interactions between human 
proteins inferred from experiments with ortholog proteins in model organisms 
(http://mint.bio.uniroma2.it/mint/).

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl950
PMCID: PMC1751541
PMID: 17135203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]