---
reference_id: PMID:26467479
title: "ChEBI in 2016: Improved services and an expanding collection of metabolites."
authors:
- Hastings J
- Owen G
- Dekker A
- Ennis M
- Kale N
- Muthukrishnan V
- Turner S
- Swainston N
- Mendes P
- Steinbeck C
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1031
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Chemical"
- Humans
- Metabolism
- Metabolomics
- Mice
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ChEBI in 2016: Improved services and an expanding collection of metabolites.
**Authors:** Hastings J, Owen G, Dekker A, Ennis M, Kale N, Muthukrishnan V, Turner S, Swainston N, Mendes P, Steinbeck C
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkv1031](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1031)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 4;44(D1):D1214-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1031. Epub 
2015 Oct 13.

ChEBI in 2016: Improved services and an expanding collection of metabolites.

Hastings J(1), Owen G(2), Dekker A(2), Ennis M(2), Kale N(2), Muthukrishnan 
V(2), Turner S(2), Swainston N(3), Mendes P(3), Steinbeck C(4).

Author information:
(1)Cheminformatics and Metabolism, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK 
hastings@ebi.ac.uk.
(2)Cheminformatics and Metabolism, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK.
(3)Manchester Centre for Integrative Systems Biology, University of Manchester, 
UK.
(4)Cheminformatics and Metabolism, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK 
steinbeck@ebi.ac.uk.

ChEBI is a database and ontology containing information about chemical entities 
of biological interest. It currently includes over 46,000 entries, each of which 
is classified within the ontology and assigned multiple annotations including 
(where relevant) a chemical structure, database cross-references, synonyms and 
literature citations. All content is freely available and can be accessed online 
at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi. In this update paper, we describe recent 
improvements and additions to the ChEBI offering. We have substantially extended 
our collection of endogenous metabolites for several organisms including human, 
mouse, Escherichia coli and yeast. Our front-end has also been reworked and 
updated, improving the user experience, removing our dependency on Java applets 
in favour of embedded JavaScript components and moving from a monthly release 
update to a 'live' website. Programmatic access has been improved by the 
introduction of a library, libChEBI, in Java, Python and Matlab. Furthermore, we 
have added two new tools, namely an analysis tool, BiNChE, and a query tool for 
the ontology, OntoQuery.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1031
PMCID: PMC4702775
PMID: 26467479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]