---
reference_id: PMID:25068035
title: "The Software Ontology (SWO): a resource for reproducibility in biomedical data analysis, curation and digital preservation."
authors:
- Malone J
- Brown A
- Lister AL
- Ison J
- Hull D
- Parkinson H
- Stevens R
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Software Ontology (SWO): a resource for reproducibility in biomedical data analysis, curation and digital preservation.
**Authors:** Malone J, Brown A, Lister AL, Ison J, Hull D, Parkinson H, Stevens R
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-25](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-25)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Jun 2;5:25. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-25. eCollection 
2014.

The Software Ontology (SWO): a resource for reproducibility in biomedical data 
analysis, curation and digital preservation.

Malone J(1), Brown A(2), Lister AL(2), Ison J(1), Hull D(2), Parkinson H(1), 
Stevens R(2).

Author information:
(1)EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK.
(2)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, 
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.

MOTIVATION: Biomedical ontologists to date have concentrated on ontological 
descriptions of biomedical entities such as gene products and their attributes, 
phenotypes and so on. Recently, effort has diversified to descriptions of the 
laboratory investigations by which these entities were produced. However, much 
biological insight is gained from the analysis of the data produced from these 
investigations, and there is a lack of adequate descriptions of the wide range 
of software that are central to bioinformatics. We need to describe how data are 
analyzed for discovery, audit trails, provenance and reproducibility.
RESULTS: The Software Ontology (SWO) is a description of software used to store, 
manage and analyze data. Input to the SWO has come from beyond the life 
sciences, but its main focus is the life sciences. We used agile techniques to 
gather input for the SWO and keep engagement with our users. The result is an 
ontology that meets the needs of a broad range of users by describing software, 
its information processing tasks, data inputs and outputs, data formats versions 
and so on. Recently, the SWO has incorporated EDAM, a vocabulary for describing 
data and related concepts in bioinformatics. The SWO is currently being used to 
describe software used in multiple biomedical applications.
CONCLUSION: The SWO is another element of the biomedical ontology landscape that 
is necessary for the description of biomedical entities and how they were 
discovered. An ontology of software used to analyze data produced by 
investigations in the life sciences can be made in such a way that it covers the 
important features requested and prioritized by its users. The SWO thus fits 
into the landscape of biomedical ontologies and is produced using techniques 
designed to keep it in line with user's needs.
AVAILABILITY: The Software Ontology is available under an Apache 2.0 license at 
http://theswo.sourceforge.net/; the Software Ontology blog can be read at 
http://softwareontology.wordpress.com.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-25
PMCID: PMC4098953
PMID: 25068035