---
reference_id: PMID:33231642
title: "Mouse Genome Database (MGD): Knowledgebase for mouse-human comparative biology."
authors:
- Blake JA
- Baldarelli R
- Kadin JA
- Richardson JE
- Smith CL
- Bult CJ
- Mouse Genome Database Group
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1083
keywords:
- Animals
- "COVID-19/epidemiology, prevention & control, virology"
- Data Curation/methods
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Epidemics
- Gene Ontology
- Genome/genetics
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval/methods
- Internet
- Knowledge Bases
- Mice
- "SARS-CoV-2/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse Genome Database (MGD): Knowledgebase for mouse-human comparative biology.
**Authors:** Blake JA, Baldarelli R, Kadin JA, Richardson JE, Smith CL, Bult CJ, Mouse Genome Database Group
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa1083](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1083)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D981-D987. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1083.

Mouse Genome Database (MGD): Knowledgebase for mouse-human comparative biology.

Blake JA(1), Baldarelli R(1), Kadin JA(1), Richardson JE(1), Smith CL(1), Bult 
CJ(1); Mouse Genome Database Group.

Collaborators: Anagnostopoulos AV, Beal JS, Bello SM, Blodgett O, Butler NE, 
Campbell J, Christie KR, Corbani LE, Dolan ME, Drabkin HJ, Flores M, Giannatto 
SL, Guerra A, Hale P, Hill DP, Judd J, Law M, McAndrews M, Miers D, Mitchell C, 
Motenko H, Ni L, Onda H, Ormsby J, Perry M, Recla JM, Shaw D, Sitnikov D, 
Tomczuk M, Wilming L, Zhu Y'.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA.

The Mouse Genome Database (MGD; http://www.informatics.jax.org) is the community 
model organism knowledgebase for the laboratory mouse, a widely used animal 
model for comparative studies of the genetic and genomic basis for human health 
and disease. MGD is the authoritative source for biological reference data 
related to mouse genes, gene functions, phenotypes and mouse models of human 
disease. MGD is the primary source for official gene, allele, and mouse strain 
nomenclature based on the guidelines set by the International Committee on 
Standardized Nomenclature for Mice. MGD's biocuration scientists curate 
information from the biomedical literature and from large and small datasets 
contributed directly by investigators. In this report we describe significant 
enhancements to the content and interfaces at MGD, including (i) improvements in 
the Multi Genome Viewer for exploring the genomes of multiple mouse strains, 
(ii) inclusion of many more mouse strains and new mouse strain pages with 
extended query options and (iii) integration of extensive data about mouse 
strain variants. We also describe improvements to the efficiency of literature 
curation processes and the implementation of an information portal focused on 
mouse models and genes for the study of COVID-19.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1083
PMCID: PMC7779030
PMID: 33231642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]