---
reference_id: PMID:33170213
title: "The Transporter Classification Database (TCDB): 2021 update."
authors:
- Saier MH
- Reddy VS
- Moreno-Hagelsieb G
- Hendargo KJ
- Zhang Y
- Iddamsetty V
- Lam KJK
- Tian N
- Russum S
- Wang J
- Medrano-Soto A
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1004
keywords:
- "Databases, Protein"
- Membrane Transport Proteins/chemistry
- Metagenomics
- Protein Domains
- Software
- Substrate Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Transporter Classification Database (TCDB): 2021 update.
**Authors:** Saier MH, Reddy VS, Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Hendargo KJ, Zhang Y, Iddamsetty V, Lam KJK, Tian N, Russum S, Wang J, Medrano-Soto A
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa1004](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1004)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D461-D467. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1004.

The Transporter Classification Database (TCDB): 2021 update.

Saier MH(1), Reddy VS(1), Moreno-Hagelsieb G(2), Hendargo KJ(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Iddamsetty V(1), Lam KJK(1), Tian N(1), Russum S(1), Wang J(1), Medrano-Soto 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University 
of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0116, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3C5, 
Canada.

The Transporter Classification Database (TCDB; tcdb.org) is a freely accessible 
reference resource, which provides functional, structural, mechanistic, medical 
and biotechnological information about transporters from organisms of all types. 
TCDB is the only transport protein classification database adopted by the 
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB) and now 
(October 1, 2020) consists of 20 653 proteins classified in 15 528 non-redundant 
transport systems with 1567 tabulated 3D structures, 18 336 reference citations 
describing 1536 transporter families, of which 26% are members of 82 recognized 
superfamilies. Overall, this is an increase of over 50% since the last published 
update of the database in 2016. This comprehensive update of the database 
contents and features include (i) adoption of a chemical ontology for substrates 
of transporters, (ii) inclusion of new superfamilies, (iii) a domain-based 
characterization of transporter families for the identification of new members 
as well as functional and evolutionary relationships between families, (iv) 
development of novel software to facilitate curation and use of the database, 
(v) addition of new subclasses of transport systems including 11 novel types of 
channels and 3 types of group translocators and (vi) the inclusion of many 
man-made (artificial) transmembrane pores/channels and carriers.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1004
PMCID: PMC7778945
PMID: 33170213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]