---
reference_id: PMID:24139024
title: "Enhanced XAO: the ontology of Xenopus anatomy and development underpins more accurate annotation of gene expression and queries on Xenbase."
authors:
- Segerdell E
- Ponferrada VG
- James-Zorn C
- Burns KA
- Fortriede JD
- Dahdul WM
- Vize PD
- Zorn AM
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-31
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhanced XAO: the ontology of Xenopus anatomy and development underpins more accurate annotation of gene expression and queries on Xenbase.
**Authors:** Segerdell E, Ponferrada VG, James-Zorn C, Burns KA, Fortriede JD, Dahdul WM, Vize PD, Zorn AM
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-31](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-31)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Oct 18;4(1):31. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-31.

Enhanced XAO: the ontology of Xenopus anatomy and development underpins more 
accurate annotation of gene expression and queries on Xenbase.

Segerdell E(1), Ponferrada VG, James-Zorn C, Burns KA, Fortriede JD, Dahdul WM, 
Vize PD, Zorn AM.

Author information:
(1)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA. segerdel@ohsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The African clawed frogs Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis are 
prominent animal model organisms. Xenopus research contributes to the 
understanding of genetic, developmental and molecular mechanisms underlying 
human disease. The Xenopus Anatomy Ontology (XAO) reflects the anatomy and 
embryological development of Xenopus. The XAO provides consistent terminology 
that can be applied to anatomical feature descriptions along with a set of 
relationships that indicate how each anatomical entity is related to others in 
the embryo, tadpole, or adult frog. The XAO is integral to the functionality of 
Xenbase (http://www.xenbase.org), the Xenopus model organism database.
RESULTS: We significantly expanded the XAO in the last five years by adding 612 
anatomical terms, 2934 relationships between them, 640 synonyms, and 547 
ontology cross-references. Each term now has a definition, so database users and 
curators can be certain they are selecting the correct term when specifying an 
anatomical entity. With developmental timing information now asserted for every 
anatomical term, the ontology provides internal checks that ensure high-quality 
gene expression and phenotype data annotation. The XAO, now with 1313 defined 
anatomical and developmental stage terms, has been integrated with Xenbase 
expression and anatomy term searches and it enables links between various data 
types including images, clones, and publications. Improvements to the XAO 
structure and anatomical definitions have also enhanced cross-references to 
anatomy ontologies of other model organisms and humans, providing a bridge 
between Xenopus data and other vertebrates. The ontology is free and open to all 
users.
CONCLUSIONS: The expanded and improved XAO allows enhanced capture of Xenopus 
research data and aids mechanisms for performing complex retrieval and analysis 
of gene expression, phenotypes, and antibodies through text-matching and manual 
curation. Its comprehensive references to ontologies across taxa help integrate 
these data for human disease modeling.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-31
PMCID: PMC3816597
PMID: 24139024