---
reference_id: PMID:25852852
title: "CLO: The cell line ontology."
authors:
- Sarntivijai S
- Lin Y
- Xiang Z
- Meehan TF
- Diehl AD
- Vempati UD
- Schürer SC
- Pang C
- Malone J
- Parkinson H
- Liu Y
- Takatsuki T
- Saijo K
- Masuya H
- Nakamura Y
- Brush MH
- Haendel MA
- Zheng J
- Stoeckert CJ
- Peters B
- Mungall CJ
- Carey TE
- States DJ
- Athey BD
- He Y
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-37
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLO: The cell line ontology.
**Authors:** Sarntivijai S, Lin Y, Xiang Z, Meehan TF, Diehl AD, Vempati UD, Schürer SC, Pang C, Malone J, Parkinson H, Liu Y, Takatsuki T, Saijo K, Masuya H, Nakamura Y, Brush MH, Haendel MA, Zheng J, Stoeckert CJ, Peters B, Mungall CJ, Carey TE, States DJ, Athey BD, He Y
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-37](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-37)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Aug 13;5:37. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-37. eCollection
 2014.

CLO: The cell line ontology.

Sarntivijai S(1), Lin Y(2), Xiang Z(2), Meehan TF(3), Diehl AD(4), Vempati 
UD(5), Schürer SC(5), Pang C(6), Malone J(3), Parkinson H(3), Liu Y(2), 
Takatsuki T(7), Saijo K(7), Masuya H(7), Nakamura Y(7), Brush MH(8), Haendel 
MA(8), Zheng J(9), Stoeckert CJ(9), Peters B(10), Mungall CJ(11), Carey TE(2), 
States DJ(12), Athey BD(2), He Y(2).

Author information:
(1)US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA ; University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK.
(4)University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(5)University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.
(6)University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(7)RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Japan.
(8)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, USA.
(9)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(10)La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(11)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(12)OncProTech LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cell lines have been widely used in biomedical research. The 
community-based Cell Line Ontology (CLO) is a member of the OBO Foundry library 
that covers the domain of cell lines. Since its publication two years ago, 
significant updates have been made, including new groups joining the CLO 
consortium, new cell line cells, upper level alignment with the Cell Ontology 
(CL) and the Ontology for Biomedical Investigation, and logical extensions.
CONSTRUCTION AND CONTENT: Collaboration among the CLO, CL, and OBI has 
established consensus definitions of cell line-specific terms such as 'cell 
line', 'cell line cell', 'cell line culturing', and 'mortal' vs. 'immortal cell 
line cell'. A cell line is a genetically stable cultured cell population that 
contains individual cell line cells. The hierarchical structure of the CLO is 
built based on the hierarchy of the in vivo cell types defined in CL and tissue 
types (from which cell line cells are derived) defined in the UBERON 
cross-species anatomy ontology. The new hierarchical structure makes it easier 
to browse, query, and perform automated classification. We have recently added 
classes representing more than 2,000 cell line cells from the RIKEN BRC Cell 
Bank to CLO. Overall, the CLO now contains ~38,000 classes of specific cell line 
cells derived from over 200 in vivo cell types from various organisms.
UTILITY AND DISCUSSION: The CLO has been applied to different biomedical 
research studies. Example case studies include annotation and analysis of EBI 
ArrayExpress data, bioassays, and host-vaccine/pathogen interaction. CLO's 
utility goes beyond a catalogue of cell line types. The alignment of the CLO 
with related ontologies combined with the use of ontological reasoners will 
support sophisticated inferencing to advance translational informatics 
development.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-37
PMCID: PMC4387853
PMID: 25852852