---
reference_id: PMID:27627881
title: The Ontology of Biological and Clinical Statistics (OBCS) for standardized and reproducible statistical analysis.
authors:
- Zheng J
- Harris MR
- Masci AM
- Lin Y
- Hero A
- Smith B
- He Y
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0100-2
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Data Mining
- Reference Standards
- Reproducibility of Results
- Statistics as Topic
- Vaccines/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Ontology of Biological and Clinical Statistics (OBCS) for standardized and reproducible statistical analysis.
**Authors:** Zheng J, Harris MR, Masci AM, Lin Y, Hero A, Smith B, He Y
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-016-0100-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-016-0100-2)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Sep 14;7(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0100-2.

The Ontology of Biological and Clinical Statistics (OBCS) for standardized and 
reproducible statistical analysis.

Zheng J(1), Harris MR(2), Masci AM(3), Lin Y(4), Hero A(5), Smith B(6), He Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. jiezheng@upenn.edu.
(2)Division of Systems Leadership and Effectiveness Science, University of 
Michigan School of Nursing, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke Medical Center, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Unit for Laboratory Animal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(5)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Department of 
Biomedical Engineering, and Department of Statistics, Michigan Institute of Data 
Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(6)Department of Philosophy and National Center for Ontological Research, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 14203, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Unit for Laboratory Animal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. 
yongqunh@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Statistics play a critical role in biological and clinical research. 
However, most reports of scientific results in the published literature make it 
difficult for the reader to reproduce the statistical analyses performed in 
achieving those results because they provide inadequate documentation of the 
statistical tests and algorithms applied. The Ontology of Biological and 
Clinical Statistics (OBCS) is put forward here as a step towards solving this 
problem.
RESULTS: The terms in OBCS including 'data collection', 'data transformation in 
statistics', 'data visualization', 'statistical data analysis', and 'drawing a 
conclusion based on data', cover the major types of statistical processes used 
in basic biological research and clinical outcome studies. OBCS is aligned with 
the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) and extends the Ontology of Biomedical 
Investigations (OBI), an OBO (Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies) Foundry 
ontology supported by over 20 research communities. Currently, OBCS comprehends 
878 terms, representing 20 BFO classes, 403 OBI classes, 229 OBCS specific 
classes, and 122 classes imported from ten other OBO ontologies. We discuss two 
examples illustrating how the ontology is being applied. In the first 
(biological) use case, we describe how OBCS was applied to represent the high 
throughput microarray data analysis of immunological transcriptional profiles in 
human subjects vaccinated with an influenza vaccine. In the second (clinical 
outcomes) use case, we applied OBCS to represent the processing of electronic 
health care data to determine the associations between hospital staffing levels 
and patient mortality. Our case studies were designed to show how OBCS can be 
used for the consistent representation of statistical analysis pipelines under 
two different research paradigms. Other ongoing projects using OBCS for 
statistical data processing are also discussed. The OBCS source code and 
documentation are available at: https://github.com/obcs/obcs .
CONCLUSIONS: The Ontology of Biological and Clinical Statistics (OBCS) is a 
community-based open source ontology in the domain of biological and clinical 
statistics. OBCS is a timely ontology that represents statistics-related terms 
and their relations in a rigorous fashion, facilitates standard data analysis 
and integration, and supports reproducible biological and clinical research.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0100-2
PMCID: PMC5024438
PMID: 27627881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]