---
reference_id: PMID:29788355
title: "SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein structures and complexes."
authors:
- Waterhouse A
- Bertoni M
- Bienert S
- Studer G
- Tauriello G
- Gumienny R
- Heer FT
- de Beer TAP
- Rempfer C
- Bordoli L
- Lepore R
- Schwede T
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky427
keywords:
- "Databases, Protein"
- Internet
- "Models, Chemical"
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Protein Conformation
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Software
- "Structural Homology, Protein"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein structures and complexes.
**Authors:** Waterhouse A, Bertoni M, Bienert S, Studer G, Tauriello G, Gumienny R, Heer FT, de Beer TAP, Rempfer C, Bordoli L, Lepore R, Schwede T
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky427](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky427)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jul 2;46(W1):W296-W303. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky427.

SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein structures and complexes.

Waterhouse A(1)(2), Bertoni M(1)(2), Bienert S(1)(2), Studer G(1)(2), Tauriello 
G(1)(2), Gumienny R(1)(2), Heer FT(1)(2), de Beer TAP(1)(2), Rempfer C(1)(2), 
Bordoli L(1)(2), Lepore R(1)(2), Schwede T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50-70, CH-4056 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Biozentrum, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 50-70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Homology modelling has matured into an important technique in structural 
biology, significantly contributing to narrowing the gap between known protein 
sequences and experimentally determined structures. Fully automated workflows 
and servers simplify and streamline the homology modelling process, also 
allowing users without a specific computational expertise to generate reliable 
protein models and have easy access to modelling results, their visualization 
and interpretation. Here, we present an update to the SWISS-MODEL server, which 
pioneered the field of automated modelling 25 years ago and been continuously 
further developed. Recently, its functionality has been extended to the 
modelling of homo- and heteromeric complexes. Starting from the amino acid 
sequences of the interacting proteins, both the stoichiometry and the overall 
structure of the complex are inferred by homology modelling. Other major 
improvements include the implementation of a new modelling engine, ProMod3 and 
the introduction a new local model quality estimation method, QMEANDisCo. 
SWISS-MODEL is freely available at https://swissmodel.expasy.org.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky427
PMCID: PMC6030848
PMID: 29788355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]