---
reference_id: PMID:33167031
title: "COG database update: focus on microbial diversity, model organisms, and widespread pathogens."
authors:
- Galperin MY
- Wolf YI
- Makarova KS
- Vera Alvarez R
- Landsman D
- Koonin EV
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1018
keywords:
- "Archaea/genetics, metabolism"
- "Archaeal Proteins/classification, genetics, metabolism"
- "Bacteria/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- "Bacterial Proteins/classification, genetics, metabolism"
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Ontology
- "Genome, Archaeal"
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- "Spores, Bacterial/genetics, growth & development"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COG database update: focus on microbial diversity, model organisms, and widespread pathogens.
**Authors:** Galperin MY, Wolf YI, Makarova KS, Vera Alvarez R, Landsman D, Koonin EV
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa1018](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1018)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D274-D281. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1018.

COG database update: focus on microbial diversity, model organisms, and 
widespread pathogens.

Galperin MY(1), Wolf YI(1), Makarova KS(1), Vera Alvarez R(1), Landsman D(1), 
Koonin EV(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20894, USA.

Comment in
    10.1093/nar/gkaa1009.

The Clusters of Orthologous Genes (COG) database, also referred to as the 
Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins, was created in 1997 and went through 
several rounds of updates, most recently, in 2014. The current update, available 
at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/COG, substantially expands the scope of 
the database to include complete genomes of 1187 bacteria and 122 archaea, 
typically, with a single genome per genus. In addition, the current version of 
the COGs includes the following new features: (i) the recently deprecated NCBI's 
gene index (gi) numbers for the encoded proteins are replaced with stable RefSeq 
or GenBank\ENA\DDBJ coding sequence (CDS) accession numbers; (ii) COG 
annotations are updated for >200 newly characterized protein families with 
corresponding references and PDB links, where available; (iii) lists of COGs 
grouped by pathways and functional systems are added; (iv) 266 new COGs for 
proteins involved in CRISPR-Cas immunity, sporulation in Firmicutes and 
photosynthesis in cyanobacteria are included; and (v) the database is made 
available as a web page, in addition to FTP. The current release includes 4877 
COGs. Future plans include further expansion of the COG collection by adding 
archaeal COGs (arCOGs), splitting the COGs containing multiple paralogs, and 
continued refinement of COG annotations.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1018
PMCID: PMC7778934
PMID: 33167031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]