---
reference_id: PMID:11911893
title: "MINT: a Molecular INTeraction database."
authors:
- Zanzoni A
- Montecchi-Palazzi L
- Quondam M
- Ausiello G
- Helmer-Citterich M
- Cesareni G
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03293-8
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Binding Sites
- "Databases, Protein"
- Protein Binding
- "Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MINT: a Molecular INTeraction database.
**Authors:** Zanzoni A, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Quondam M, Ausiello G, Helmer-Citterich M, Cesareni G
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03293-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03293-8)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2002 Feb 20;513(1):135-40. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03293-8.

MINT: a Molecular INTeraction database.

Zanzoni A(1), Montecchi-Palazzi L, Quondam M, Ausiello G, Helmer-Citterich M, 
Cesareni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca 
Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy.

Protein interaction databases represent unique tools to store, in a computer 
readable form, the protein interaction information disseminated in the 
scientific literature. Well organized and easily accessible databases permit the 
easy retrieval and analysis of large interaction data sets. Here we present 
MINT, a database (http://cbm.bio.uniroma2.it/mint/index.html) designed to store 
data on functional interactions between proteins. Beyond cataloguing binary 
complexes, MINT was conceived to store other types of functional interactions, 
including enzymatic modifications of one of the partners. Release 1.0 of MINT 
focuses on experimentally verified protein-protein interactions. Both direct and 
indirect relationships are considered. Furthermore, MINT aims at being 
exhaustive in the description of the interaction and, whenever available, 
information about kinetic and binding constants and about the domains 
participating in the interaction is included in the entry. MINT consists of 
entries extracted from the scientific literature by expert curators assisted by 
'MINT Assistant', a software that targets abstracts containing interaction 
information and presents them to the curator in a user-friendly format. The 
interaction data can be easily extracted and viewed graphically through 'MINT 
Viewer'. Presently MINT contains 4568 interactions, 782 of which are indirect or 
genetic interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)03293-8
PMID: 11911893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]