---
reference_id: PMID:35562840
title: "SynLethDB 2.0: a web-based knowledge graph database on synthetic lethality for novel anticancer drug discovery."
authors:
- Wang J
- Wu M
- Huang X
- Wang L
- Zhang S
- Liu H
- Zheng J
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/database/baac030
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Humans
- Internet
- Neoplasms/genetics
- "Pattern Recognition, Automated"
- Synthetic Lethal Mutations
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SynLethDB 2.0: a web-based knowledge graph database on synthetic lethality for novel anticancer drug discovery.
**Authors:** Wang J, Wu M, Huang X, Wang L, Zhang S, Liu H, Zheng J
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/baac030](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/baac030)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2022 May 13;2022:baac030. doi: 10.1093/database/baac030.

SynLethDB 2.0: a web-based knowledge graph database on synthetic lethality for 
novel anticancer drug discovery.

Wang J(1), Wu M(2), Huang X(3), Wang L(1), Zhang S(4), Liu H(5), Zheng J(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 393 
Middle Huaxia Road, Pudong, Shanghai 201210, China.
(2)Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), 1 Fusionopolis Way, Singapore 138632, Singapore.
(3)School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Computing 1, 13 
Computing Drive, Singapore 117417, Singapore.
(4)College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cornell University, 260 Roberts 
Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(5)School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing Tech University, 30 Puzhu 
Road, Nanjing 211816, China.
(6)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging, 393 
Middle Huaxia Road, Pudong, Shanghai 201210, China.

Two genes are synthetic lethal if mutations in both genes result in impaired 
cell viability, while mutation of either gene does not affect the cell survival. 
The potential usage of synthetic lethality (SL) in anticancer therapeutics has 
attracted many researchers to identify synthetic lethal gene pairs. To include 
newly identified SLs and more related knowledge, we present a new version of the 
SynLethDB database to facilitate the discovery of clinically relevant SLs. We 
extended the first version of SynLethDB database significantly by including new 
SLs identified through Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats 
(CRISPR) screening, a knowledge graph about human SLs, a new web interface, etc. 
Over 16 000 new SLs and 26 types of other relationships have been added, 
encompassing relationships among 14 100 genes, 53 cancers, 1898 drugs, etc. 
Moreover, a brand-new web interface has been developed to include modules such 
as SL query by disease or compound, SL partner gene set enrichment analysis and 
knowledge graph browsing through a dynamic graph viewer. The data can be 
downloaded directly from the website or through the RESTful Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs). Database URL: 
 https://synlethdb.sist.shanghaitech.edu.cn/v2.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baac030
PMCID: PMC9216587
PMID: 35562840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]