---
reference_id: PMID:31713623
title: "The Year of the Rat: The Rat Genome Database at 20: a multi-species knowledgebase and analysis platform."
authors:
- Smith JR
- Hayman GT
- Wang SJ
- Laulederkind SJF
- Hoffman MJ
- Kaldunski ML
- Tutaj M
- Thota J
- Nalabolu HS
- Ellanki SLR
- Tutaj MA
- De Pons JL
- Kwitek AE
- Dwinell MR
- Shimoyama ME
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1041
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Animals
- Chinchilla/genetics
- Chromosome Mapping
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Dogs/genetics
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Variation
- Genome
- Humans
- Internet
- Mice/genetics
- Pan troglodytes/genetics
- Phenotype
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- Rats/genetics
- Retina/metabolism
- Sciuridae/genetics
- Software
- Species Specificity
- Swine/genetics
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Year of the Rat: The Rat Genome Database at 20: a multi-species knowledgebase and analysis platform.
**Authors:** Smith JR, Hayman GT, Wang SJ, Laulederkind SJF, Hoffman MJ, Kaldunski ML, Tutaj M, Thota J, Nalabolu HS, Ellanki SLR, Tutaj MA, De Pons JL, Kwitek AE, Dwinell MR, Shimoyama ME
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkz1041](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz1041)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Jan 8;48(D1):D731-D742. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1041.

The Year of the Rat: The Rat Genome Database at 20: a multi-species 
knowledgebase and analysis platform.

Smith JR(1), Hayman GT(1), Wang SJ(1), Laulederkind SJF(1), Hoffman MJ(1)(2), 
Kaldunski ML(1), Tutaj M(1), Thota J(1), Nalabolu HS(1), Ellanki SLR(1), Tutaj 
MA(1), De Pons JL(1), Kwitek AE(2), Dwinell MR(2), Shimoyama ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Rat Genome Database, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
(2)Genomic Sciences and Precision Medicine Center and Department of Physiology, 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Formed in late 1999, the Rat Genome Database (RGD, https://rgd.mcw.edu) will be 
20 in 2020, the Year of the Rat. Because the laboratory rat, Rattus norvegicus, 
has been used as a model for complex human diseases such as cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes, cancer, neurological disorders and arthritis, among others, 
for >150 years, RGD has always been disease-focused and committed to providing 
data and tools for researchers doing comparative genomics and translational 
studies. At its inception, before the sequencing of the rat genome, RGD started 
with only a few data types localized on genetic and radiation hybrid (RH) maps 
and offered only a few tools for querying and consolidating that data. Since 
that time, RGD has expanded to include a wealth of structured and standardized 
genetic, genomic, phenotypic, and disease-related data for eight species, and a 
suite of innovative tools for querying, analyzing and visualizing this data. 
This article provides an overview of recent substantial additions and 
improvements to RGD's data and tools that can assist researchers in finding and 
utilizing the data they need, whether their goal is to develop new precision 
models of disease or to more fully explore emerging details within a system or 
across multiple systems.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz1041
PMCID: PMC7145519
PMID: 31713623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]