---
reference_id: PMID:31584097
title: The International Genome Sample Resource (IGSR) collection of open human genomic variation resources.
authors:
- Fairley S
- Lowy-Gallego E
- Perry E
- Flicek P
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz836
keywords:
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genetic Variation
- "Genome, Human"
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Software
- User-Computer Interface
- Web Browser
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The International Genome Sample Resource (IGSR) collection of open human genomic variation resources.
**Authors:** Fairley S, Lowy-Gallego E, Perry E, Flicek P
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkz836](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz836)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Jan 8;48(D1):D941-D947. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz836.

The International Genome Sample Resource (IGSR) collection of open human genomic 
variation resources.

Fairley S(1), Lowy-Gallego E(1), Perry E(1), Flicek P(1).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.

To sustain and develop the largest fully open human genomic resources the 
International Genome Sample Resource (IGSR) 
(https://www.internationalgenome.org) was established. It is built on the 
foundation of the 1000 Genomes Project, which created the largest openly 
accessible catalogue of human genomic variation developed from samples spanning 
five continents. IGSR (i) maintains access to 1000 Genomes Project resources, 
(ii) updates 1000 Genomes Project resources to the GRCh38 human reference 
assembly, (iii) adds new data generated on 1000 Genomes Project cell lines, (iv) 
shares data from samples with a similarly open consent to increase the number of 
samples and populations represented in the resources and (v) provides support to 
users of these resources. Among recent updates are the release of variation 
calls from 1000 Genomes Project data calculated directly on GRCh38 and the 
addition of high coverage sequence data for the 2504 samples in the 1000 Genomes 
Project phase three panel. The data portal, which facilitates web-based 
exploration of the IGSR resources, has been updated to include samples which 
were not part of the 1000 Genomes Project and now presents a unified view of 
data and samples across almost 5000 samples from multiple studies. All data is 
fully open and publicly accessible.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz836
PMCID: PMC6943028
PMID: 31584097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]