---
reference_id: PMID:17942422
title: "SuperTarget and Matador: resources for exploring drug-target relationships."
authors:
- Günther S
- Kuhn M
- Dunkel M
- Campillos M
- Senger C
- Petsalaki E
- Ahmed J
- Urdiales EG
- Gewiess A
- Jensen LJ
- Schneider R
- Skoblo R
- Russell RB
- Bourne PE
- Bork P
- Preissner R
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm862
keywords:
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug Delivery Systems
- Drug Design
- Internet
- "Pharmaceutical Preparations/chemistry, metabolism"
- Pharmacology
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SuperTarget and Matador: resources for exploring drug-target relationships.
**Authors:** Günther S, Kuhn M, Dunkel M, Campillos M, Senger C, Petsalaki E, Ahmed J, Urdiales EG, Gewiess A, Jensen LJ, Schneider R, Skoblo R, Russell RB, Bourne PE, Bork P, Preissner R
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkm862](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm862)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(Database issue):D919-22. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkm862.  Epub 2007 Oct 16.

SuperTarget and Matador: resources for exploring drug-target relationships.

Günther S(1), Kuhn M, Dunkel M, Campillos M, Senger C, Petsalaki E, Ahmed J, 
Urdiales EG, Gewiess A, Jensen LJ, Schneider R, Skoblo R, Russell RB, Bourne PE, 
Bork P, Preissner R.

Author information:
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Group, Institute of Molecular Biology and 
Bioinformatics, Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Arnimallee 22, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany.

The molecular basis of drug action is often not well understood. This is partly 
because the very abundant and diverse information generated in the past decades 
on drugs is hidden in millions of medical articles or textbooks. Therefore, we 
developed a one-stop data warehouse, SuperTarget that integrates drug-related 
information about medical indication areas, adverse drug effects, drug 
metabolization, pathways and Gene Ontology terms of the target proteins. An 
easy-to-use query interface enables the user to pose complex queries, for 
example to find drugs that target a certain pathway, interacting drugs that are 
metabolized by the same cytochrome P450 or drugs that target the same protein 
but are metabolized by different enzymes. Furthermore, we provide tools for 2D 
drug screening and sequence comparison of the targets. The database contains 
more than 2500 target proteins, which are annotated with about 7300 relations to 
1500 drugs; the vast majority of entries have pointers to the respective 
literature source. A subset of these drugs has been annotated with additional 
binding information and indirect interactions and is available as a separate 
resource called Matador. SuperTarget and Matador are available at 
http://insilico.charite.de/supertarget and http://matador.embl.de.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm862
PMCID: PMC2238858
PMID: 17942422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]