---
reference_id: PMID:24177753
title: Analyzing gene expression data in mice with the Neuro Behavior Ontology.
authors:
- Hoehndorf R
- Hancock JM
- Hardy NW
- Mallon AM
- Schofield PN
- Gkoutos GV
journal: Mamm Genome
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s00335-013-9481-z
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology
- Gene Expression
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Genetics, Behavioral"
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analyzing gene expression data in mice with the Neuro Behavior Ontology.
**Authors:** Hoehndorf R, Hancock JM, Hardy NW, Mallon AM, Schofield PN, Gkoutos GV
**Journal:** Mamm Genome (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00335-013-9481-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00335-013-9481-z)

## Content

1. Mamm Genome. 2014 Feb;25(1-2):32-40. doi: 10.1007/s00335-013-9481-z. Epub 2013
 Nov 1.

Analyzing gene expression data in mice with the Neuro Behavior Ontology.

Hoehndorf R(1), Hancock JM, Hardy NW, Mallon AM, Schofield PN, Gkoutos GV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Aberystwyth, Old College, King 
Street, Aberystwyth, SY23 2AX, UK, roh25@aber.ac.uk.

We have applied the Neuro Behavior Ontology (NBO), an ontology for the 
annotation of behavioral gene functions and behavioral phenotypes, to the 
annotation of more than 1,000 genes in the mouse that are known to play a role 
in behavior. These annotations can be explored by researchers interested in 
genes involved in particular behaviors and used computationally to provide 
insights into the behavioral phenotypes resulting from differences in gene 
expression. We developed the OntoFUNC tool and have applied it to enrichment 
analyses over the NBO to provide high-level behavioral interpretations of gene 
expression datasets. The resulting increase in the number of gene annotations 
facilitates the identification of behavioral or neurologic processes by 
assisting the formulation of hypotheses about the relationships between gene, 
processes, and phenotypic manifestations resulting from behavioral observations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-013-9481-z
PMID: 24177753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]