---
reference_id: PMID:36177882
title: "Ribocentre: a database of ribozymes."
authors:
- Deng J
- Shi Y
- Peng X
- He Y
- Chen X
- Li M
- Lin X
- Liao W
- Huang Y
- Jiang T
- Lilley DMJ
- Miao Z
- Huang L
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac840
keywords:
- Humans
- Base Sequence
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- "RNA, Catalytic/chemistry"
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ribocentre: a database of ribozymes.
**Authors:** Deng J, Shi Y, Peng X, He Y, Chen X, Li M, Lin X, Liao W, Huang Y, Jiang T, Lilley DMJ, Miao Z, Huang L
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac840](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac840)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D262-D268. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac840.

Ribocentre: a database of ribozymes.

Deng J(1), Shi Y(2)(3), Peng X(1), He Y(1), Chen X(1)(4), Li M(1), Lin X(1)(5), 
Liao W(1)(5), Huang Y(1), Jiang T(3), Lilley DMJ(6), Miao Z(3)(7), Huang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene 
Regulation, Guangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory for RNA Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen 
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
201210, China.
(3)Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou International Bio Island, Guangzhou 510005, 
China.
(4)Department of pharmacy, Sun-Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(5)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Guangzhou 510120, China.
(6)Cancer Research UK Nucleic Acid Structure Research Group, MSI/WTB Complex, 
The University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.
(7)Translational Research Institute of Brain and Brain-Like Intelligence and 
Department of Anesthesiology, Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200434, China.

Ribozymes are excellent systems in which to study 'sequence - structure - 
function' relationships in RNA molecules. Understanding these relationships may 
greatly help structural modeling and design of functional RNA structures and 
some functional structural modules could be repurposed in molecular design. At 
present, there is no comprehensive database summarising all the natural ribozyme 
families. We have therefore created Ribocentre, a database that collects 
together sequence, structure and mechanistic data on 21 ribozyme families. This 
includes available information on timelines, sequence families, secondary and 
tertiary structures, catalytic mechanisms, applications of the ribozymes 
together with key publications. The database is publicly available at 
https://www.ribocentre.org.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac840
PMCID: PMC9825448
PMID: 36177882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]