---
reference_id: PMID:24139062
title: The Drosophila anatomy ontology.
authors:
- Costa M
- Reeve S
- Grumbling G
- Osumi-Sutherland D
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-32
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Drosophila anatomy ontology.
**Authors:** Costa M, Reeve S, Grumbling G, Osumi-Sutherland D
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-32](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-32)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Oct 18;4(1):32. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-32.

The Drosophila anatomy ontology.

Costa M, Reeve S, Grumbling G, Osumi-Sutherland D(1).

Author information:
(1)FlyBase, Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, 
Cambridge, UK. djs93@gen.cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Anatomy ontologies are query-able classifications of anatomical 
structures. They provide a widely-used means for standardising the annotation of 
phenotypes and expression in both human-readable and programmatically accessible 
forms. They are also frequently used to group annotations in biologically 
meaningful ways. Accurate annotation requires clear textual definitions for 
terms, ideally accompanied by images. Accurate grouping and fruitful 
programmatic usage requires high-quality formal definitions that can be used to 
automate classification and check for errors. The Drosophila anatomy ontology 
(DAO) consists of over 8000 classes with broad coverage of Drosophila anatomy. 
It has been used extensively for annotation by a range of resources, but until 
recently it was poorly formalised and had few textual definitions.
RESULTS: We have transformed the DAO into an ontology rich in formal and textual 
definitions in which the majority of classifications are automated and extensive 
error checking ensures quality. Here we present an overview of the content of 
the DAO, the patterns used in its formalisation, and the various uses it has 
been put to.
CONCLUSIONS: As a result of the work described here, the DAO provides a 
high-quality, queryable reference for the wild-type anatomy of Drosophila 
melanogaster and a set of terms to annotate data related to that anatomy. 
Extensive, well referenced textual definitions make it both a reliable and 
useful reference and ensure accurate use in annotation. Wide use of formal 
axioms allows a large proportion of classification to be automated and the use 
of consistency checking to eliminate errors. This increased formalisation has 
resulted in significant improvements to the completeness and accuracy of 
classification. The broad use of both formal and informal definitions make 
further development of the ontology sustainable and scalable. The patterns of 
formalisation used in the DAO are likely to be useful to developers of other 
anatomy ontologies.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-32
PMCID: PMC4015547
PMID: 24139062