---
reference_id: PMID:36350631
title: "Introducing the Bacterial and Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center (BV-BRC): a resource combining PATRIC, IRD and ViPR."
authors:
- Olson RD
- Assaf R
- Brettin T
- Conrad N
- Cucinell C
- Davis JJ
- Dempsey DM
- Dickerman A
- Dietrich EM
- Kenyon RW
- Kuscuoglu M
- Lefkowitz EJ
- Lu J
- Machi D
- Macken C
- Mao C
- Niewiadomska A
- Nguyen M
- Olsen GJ
- Overbeek JC
- Parrello B
- Parrello V
- Porter JS
- Pusch GD
- Shukla M
- Singh I
- Stewart L
- Tan G
- Thomas C
- VanOeffelen M
- Vonstein V
- Wallace ZS
- Warren AS
- Wattam AR
- Xia F
- Yoo H
- Zhang Y
- Zmasek CM
- Scheuermann RH
- Stevens RL
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1003
keywords:
- Humans
- Bacteria/genetics
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genomics
- "Influenza, Human"
- Viruses/genetics
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Introducing the Bacterial and Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center (BV-BRC): a resource combining PATRIC, IRD and ViPR.
**Authors:** Olson RD, Assaf R, Brettin T, Conrad N, Cucinell C, Davis JJ, Dempsey DM, Dickerman A, Dietrich EM, Kenyon RW, Kuscuoglu M, Lefkowitz EJ, Lu J, Machi D, Macken C, Mao C, Niewiadomska A, Nguyen M, Olsen GJ, Overbeek JC, Parrello B, Parrello V, Porter JS, Pusch GD, Shukla M, Singh I, Stewart L, Tan G, Thomas C, VanOeffelen M, Vonstein V, Wallace ZS, Warren AS, Wattam AR, Xia F, Yoo H, Zhang Y, Zmasek CM, Scheuermann RH, Stevens RL
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac1003](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac1003)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D678-D689. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1003.

Introducing the Bacterial and Viral Bioinformatics Resource Center (BV-BRC): a 
resource combining PATRIC, IRD and ViPR.

Olson RD(1)(2), Assaf R(3), Brettin T(1)(4), Conrad N(1)(2), Cucinell C(5), 
Davis JJ(1)(2), Dempsey DM(6), Dickerman A(5), Dietrich EM(1)(2), Kenyon RW(5), 
Kuscuoglu M(7), Lefkowitz EJ(6), Lu J(8), Machi D(5), Macken C(9), Mao C(5), 
Niewiadomska A(7), Nguyen M(1)(2), Olsen GJ(10), Overbeek JC(1)(2), Parrello 
B(1)(11), Parrello V(11), Porter JS(4), Pusch GD(11), Shukla M(1)(2), Singh 
I(8), Stewart L(7), Tan G(7), Thomas C(1)(2), VanOeffelen M(11), Vonstein V(11), 
Wallace ZS(6)(12), Warren AS(5), Wattam AR(5), Xia F(1)(2), Yoo H(1)(2), Zhang 
Y(7), Zmasek CM(7), Scheuermann RH(7)(13)(14)(15), Stevens RL(4)(16).

Author information:
(1)Consortium for Advanced Science and Engineering, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)Division of Data Science and Learning, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, 
IL 60439, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, American University of 
Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(4)Computing Environment and Life Sciences, Argonne National Laboratory, 
Argonne, IL 60439, USA.
(5)University of Virginia Biocomplexity Institute, Charlottesville, 
VA 22904, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of 
Medicine, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(7)Department of Informatics, J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.
(8)J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(9)Department of Statistics, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(10)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(11)Fellowship for Interpretation of Genomes, Burr Ridge, IL 60527, USA.
(12)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, 
San Diego, CA 92039, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(14)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.
(15)Global Virus Network, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(16)Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA.

The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) established 
the Bioinformatics Resource Center (BRC) program to assist researchers with 
analyzing the growing body of genome sequence and other omics-related data. In 
this report, we describe the merger of the PAThosystems Resource Integration 
Center (PATRIC), the Influenza Research Database (IRD) and the Virus Pathogen 
Database and Analysis Resource (ViPR) BRCs to form the Bacterial and Viral 
Bioinformatics Resource Center (BV-BRC) https://www.bv-brc.org/. The combined 
BV-BRC leverages the functionality of the bacterial and viral resources to 
provide a unified data model, enhanced web-based visualization and analysis 
tools, bioinformatics services, and a powerful suite of command line tools that 
benefit the bacterial and viral research communities.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2022.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac1003
PMCID: PMC9825582
PMID: 36350631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]