---
reference_id: PMID:25093068
title: "OAE: The Ontology of Adverse Events."
authors:
- He Y
- Sarntivijai S
- Lin Y
- Xiang Z
- Guo A
- Zhang S
- Jagannathan D
- Toldo L
- Tao C
- Smith B
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-29
content_type: abstract_only
---

# OAE: The Ontology of Adverse Events.
**Authors:** He Y, Sarntivijai S, Lin Y, Xiang Z, Guo A, Zhang S, Jagannathan D, Toldo L, Tao C, Smith B
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-29](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-29)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Jul 5;5:29. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-29. eCollection 
2014.

OAE: The Ontology of Adverse Events.

He Y(1), Sarntivijai S(2), Lin Y(1), Xiang Z(1), Guo A(1), Zhang S(1), 
Jagannathan D(1), Toldo L(3), Tao C(4), Smith B(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA ; US Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(3)Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
(4)University at Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: A medical intervention is a medical procedure or application 
intended to relieve or prevent illness or injury. Examples of medical 
interventions include vaccination and drug administration. After a medical 
intervention, adverse events (AEs) may occur which lie outside the intended 
consequences of the intervention. The representation and analysis of AEs are 
critical to the improvement of public health.
DESCRIPTION: The Ontology of Adverse Events (OAE), previously named Adverse 
Event Ontology (AEO), is a community-driven ontology developed to standardize 
and integrate data relating to AEs arising subsequent to medical interventions, 
as well as to support computer-assisted reasoning. OAE has over 3,000 terms with 
unique identifiers, including terms imported from existing ontologies and more 
than 1,800 OAE-specific terms. In OAE, the term 'adverse event' denotes a 
pathological bodily process in a patient that occurs after a medical 
intervention. Causal adverse events are defined by OAE as those events that are 
causal consequences of a medical intervention. OAE represents various adverse 
events based on patient anatomic regions and clinical outcomes, including 
symptoms, signs, and abnormal processes. OAE has been used in the analysis of 
several different sorts of vaccine and drug adverse event data. For example, 
using the data extracted from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System 
(VAERS), OAE was used to analyse vaccine adverse events associated with the 
administrations of different types of influenza vaccines. OAE has also been used 
to represent and classify the vaccine adverse events cited in package inserts of 
FDA-licensed human vaccines in the USA.
CONCLUSION: OAE is a biomedical ontology that logically defines and classifies 
various adverse events occurring after medical interventions. OAE has 
successfully been applied in several adverse event studies. The OAE ontological 
framework provides a platform for systematic representation and analysis of 
adverse events and of the factors (e.g., vaccinee age) important for determining 
their clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-29
PMCID: PMC4120740
PMID: 25093068