---
reference_id: PMID:24138933
title: The Drosophila phenotype ontology.
authors:
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Marygold SJ
- Millburn GH
- McQuilton PA
- Ponting L
- Stefancsik R
- Falls K
- Brown NH
- Gkoutos GV
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-30
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Drosophila phenotype ontology.
**Authors:** Osumi-Sutherland D, Marygold SJ, Millburn GH, McQuilton PA, Ponting L, Stefancsik R, Falls K, Brown NH, Gkoutos GV
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-30](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-30)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Oct 18;4(1):30. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-30.

The Drosophila phenotype ontology.

Osumi-Sutherland D(1), Marygold SJ, Millburn GH, McQuilton PA, Ponting L, 
Stefancsik R, Falls K, Brown NH, Gkoutos GV.

Author information:
(1)FlyBase, Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, 
Cambridge, UK. djs93@gen.cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Phenotype ontologies are queryable classifications of phenotypes. 
They provide a widely-used means for annotating phenotypes in a form that is 
human-readable, programatically accessible and that can be used to group 
annotations in biologically meaningful ways. Accurate manual annotation requires 
clear textual definitions for terms. Accurate grouping and fruitful programatic 
usage require high-quality formal definitions that can be used to automate 
classification. The Drosophila phenotype ontology (DPO) has been used to 
annotate over 159,000 phenotypes in FlyBase to date, but until recently lacked 
textual or formal definitions.
RESULTS: We have composed textual definitions for all DPO terms and formal 
definitions for 77% of them. Formal definitions reference terms from a range of 
widely-used ontologies including the Phenotype and Trait Ontology (PATO), the 
Gene Ontology (GO) and the Cell Ontology (CL). We also describe a generally 
applicable system, devised for the DPO, for recording and reasoning about the 
timing of death in populations. As a result of the new formalisations, 85% of 
classifications in the DPO are now inferred rather than asserted, with much of 
this classification leveraging the structure of the GO. This work has 
significantly improved the accuracy and completeness of classification and made 
further development of the DPO more sustainable.
CONCLUSIONS: The DPO provides a set of well-defined terms for annotating 
Drosophila phenotypes and for grouping and querying the resulting annotation 
sets in biologically meaningful ways. Such queries have already resulted in 
successful function predictions from phenotype annotation. Moreover, such 
formalisations make extended queries possible, including cross-species queries 
via the external ontologies used in formal definitions. The DPO is openly 
available under an open source license in both OBO and OWL formats. There is 
good potential for it to be used more broadly by the Drosophila community, which 
may ultimately result in its extension to cover a broader range of phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-30
PMCID: PMC3816596
PMID: 24138933