---
reference_id: PMID:38376816
title: "PomBase: a Global Core Biodata Resource-growth, collaboration, and sustainability."
authors:
- Rutherford KM
- Lera-Ramírez M
- Wood V
journal: Genetics
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyae007
keywords:
- Schizosaccharomyces/genetics
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genome, Fungal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PomBase: a Global Core Biodata Resource-growth, collaboration, and sustainability.
**Authors:** Rutherford KM, Lera-Ramírez M, Wood V
**Journal:** Genetics (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/iyae007](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyae007)

## Content

1. Genetics. 2024 May 7;227(1):iyae007. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyae007.

PomBase: a Global Core Biodata Resource-growth, collaboration, and 
sustainability.

Rutherford KM(1), Lera-Ramírez M(2), Wood V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.
(2)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London WC1E 6BT, UK.

PomBase (https://www.pombase.org), the model organism database (MOD) for fission 
yeast, was recently awarded Global Core Biodata Resource (GCBR) status by the 
Global Biodata Coalition (GBC; https://globalbiodata.org/) after a rigorous 
selection process. In this MOD review, we present PomBase's continuing growth 
and improvement over the last 2 years. We describe these improvements in the 
context of the qualitative GCBR indicators related to scientific quality, 
comprehensivity, accelerating science, user stories, and collaborations with 
other biodata resources. This review also showcases the depth of existing 
connections both within the biocuration ecosystem and between PomBase and its 
user community.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyae007
PMCID: PMC11075564
PMID: 38376816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.