---
reference_id: PMID:23937709
title: "The Vertebrate Trait Ontology: a controlled vocabulary for the annotation of trait data across species."
authors:
- Park CA
- Bello SM
- Smith CL
- Hu ZL
- Munzenmaier DH
- Nigam R
- Smith JR
- Shimoyama M
- Eppig JT
- Reecy JM
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-13
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Vertebrate Trait Ontology: a controlled vocabulary for the annotation of trait data across species.
**Authors:** Park CA, Bello SM, Smith CL, Hu ZL, Munzenmaier DH, Nigam R, Smith JR, Shimoyama M, Eppig JT, Reecy JM
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-13](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-13)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Aug 9;4(1):13. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-13.

The Vertebrate Trait Ontology: a controlled vocabulary for the annotation of 
trait data across species.

Park CA(1), Bello SM, Smith CL, Hu ZL, Munzenmaier DH, Nigam R, Smith JR, 
Shimoyama M, Eppig JT, Reecy JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA. 
jreecy@iastate.edu.

BACKGROUND: The use of ontologies to standardize biological data and facilitate 
comparisons among datasets has steadily grown as the complexity and amount of 
available data have increased. Despite the numerous ontologies available, one 
area currently lacking a robust ontology is the description of vertebrate 
traits. A trait is defined as any measurable or observable characteristic 
pertaining to an organism or any of its substructures. While there are several 
ontologies to describe entities and processes in phenotypes, diseases, and 
clinical measurements, one has not been developed for vertebrate traits; the 
Vertebrate Trait Ontology (VT) was created to fill this void.
DESCRIPTION: Significant inconsistencies in trait nomenclature exist in the 
literature, and additional difficulties arise when trait data are compared 
across species. The VT is a unified trait vocabulary created to aid in the 
transfer of data within and between species and to facilitate investigation of 
the genetic basis of traits. Trait information provides a valuable link between 
the measurements that are used to assess the trait, the phenotypes related to 
the traits, and the diseases associated with one or more phenotypes. Because 
multiple clinical and morphological measurements are often used to assess a 
single trait, and a single measurement can be used to assess multiple 
physiological processes, providing investigators with standardized annotations 
for trait data will allow them to investigate connections among these data 
types.
CONCLUSIONS: The annotation of genomic data with ontology terms provides unique 
opportunities for data mining and analysis. Links between data in disparate 
databases can be identified and explored, a strategy that is particularly useful 
for cross-species comparisons or in situations involving inconsistent 
terminology. The VT provides a common basis for the description of traits in 
multiple vertebrate species. It is being used in the Rat Genome Database and 
Animal QTL Database for annotation of QTL data for rat, cattle, chicken, swine, 
sheep, and rainbow trout, and in the Mouse Phenome Database to annotate strain 
characterization data. In these databases, data are also cross-referenced to 
applicable terms from other ontologies, providing additional avenues for data 
mining and analysis. The ontology is available at 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/50138.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-13
PMCID: PMC3851175
PMID: 23937709