---
reference_id: PMID:26516187
title: "SynLethDB: synthetic lethality database toward discovery of selective and sensitive anticancer drug targets."
authors:
- Guo J
- Liu H
- Zheng J
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1108
keywords:
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology
- Cell Death
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Data Interpretation, Statistical"
- "Databases, Pharmaceutical"
- Drug Discovery
- "Genes, Neoplasm"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- RNA Interference
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SynLethDB: synthetic lethality database toward discovery of selective and sensitive anticancer drug targets.
**Authors:** Guo J, Liu H, Zheng J
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkv1108](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1108)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 4;44(D1):D1011-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1108. Epub 
2015 Oct 29.

SynLethDB: synthetic lethality database toward discovery of selective and 
sensitive anticancer drug targets.

Guo J(1), Liu H(2), Zheng J(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
639798, Singapore.
(2)School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
639798, Singapore Lab of Information Management, Changzhou University, Jiangsu 
213164, China hliu@cczu.edu.cn.
(3)School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
639798, Singapore Genome Institute of Singapore (GIS), Biopolis, Singapore 
138672, Singapore ZhengJie@ntu.edu.sg.

Synthetic lethality (SL) is a type of genetic interaction between two genes such 
that simultaneous perturbations of the two genes result in cell death or a 
dramatic decrease of cell viability, while a perturbation of either gene alone 
is not lethal. SL reflects the biologically endogenous difference between cancer 
cells and normal cells, and thus the inhibition of SL partners of genes with 
cancer-specific mutations could selectively kill cancer cells but spare normal 
cells. Therefore, SL is emerging as a promising anticancer strategy that could 
potentially overcome the drawbacks of traditional chemotherapies by reducing 
severe side effects. Researchers have developed experimental technologies and 
computational prediction methods to identify SL gene pairs on human and a few 
model species. However, there has not been a comprehensive database dedicated to 
collecting SL pairs and related knowledge. In this paper, we propose a 
comprehensive database, SynLethDB (http://histone.sce.ntu.edu.sg/SynLethDB/), 
which contains SL pairs collected from biochemical assays, other related 
databases, computational predictions and text mining results on human and four 
model species, i.e. mouse, fruit fly, worm and yeast. For each SL pair, a 
confidence score was calculated by integrating individual scores derived from 
different evidence sources. We also developed a statistical analysis module to 
estimate the druggability and sensitivity of cancer cells upon drug treatments 
targeting human SL partners, based on large-scale genomic data, gene expression 
profiles and drug sensitivity profiles on more than 1000 cancer cell lines. To 
help users access and mine the wealth of the data, we developed other practical 
functionalities, such as search and filtering, orthology search, gene set 
enrichment analysis. Furthermore, a user-friendly web interface has been 
implemented to facilitate data analysis and interpretation. With the integrated 
data sets and analytics functionalities, SynLethDB would be a useful resource 
for biomedical research community and pharmaceutical industry.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1108
PMCID: PMC4702809
PMID: 26516187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]