---
reference_id: PMID:29106569
title: "Mechanism and Catalytic Site Atlas (M-CSA): a database of enzyme reaction mechanisms and active sites."
authors:
- Ribeiro AJM
- Holliday GL
- Furnham N
- Tyzack JD
- Ferris K
- Thornton JM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1012
keywords:
- Biocatalysis
- Catalytic Domain
- Data Curation
- "Databases, Protein"
- "Enzymes/chemistry, metabolism"
- Humans
- Internet
- User-Computer Interface
- Web Browser
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism and Catalytic Site Atlas (M-CSA): a database of enzyme reaction mechanisms and active sites.
**Authors:** Ribeiro AJM, Holliday GL, Furnham N, Tyzack JD, Ferris K, Thornton JM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkx1012](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1012)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jan 4;46(D1):D618-D623. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1012.

Mechanism and Catalytic Site Atlas (M-CSA): a database of enzyme reaction 
mechanisms and active sites.

Ribeiro AJM(1), Holliday GL(1), Furnham N(2), Tyzack JD(1), Ferris K(1), 
Thornton JM(1).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.
(2)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London WC1E 1HT, UK.

M-CSA (Mechanism and Catalytic Site Atlas) is a database of enzyme active sites 
and reaction mechanisms that can be accessed at 
www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/m-csa. Our objectives with M-CSA are to provide an 
open data resource for the community to browse known enzyme reaction mechanisms 
and catalytic sites, and to use the dataset to understand enzyme function and 
evolution. M-CSA results from the merging of two existing databases, MACiE 
(Mechanism, Annotation and Classification in Enzymes), a database of enzyme 
mechanisms, and CSA (Catalytic Site Atlas), a database of catalytic sites of 
enzymes. We are releasing M-CSA as a new website and underlying database 
architecture. At the moment, M-CSA contains 961 entries, 423 of these with 
detailed mechanism information, and 538 with information on the catalytic site 
residues only. In total, these cover 81% (195/241) of third level EC numbers 
with a PDB structure, and 30% (840/2793) of fourth level EC numbers with a PDB 
structure, out of 6028 in total. By searching for close homologues, we are able 
to extend M-CSA coverage of PDB and UniProtKB to 51 993 structures and to over 
five million sequences, respectively, of which about 40% and 30% have a 
conserved active site.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1012
PMCID: PMC5753290
PMID: 29106569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]