---
reference_id: PMID:22115179
title: "iRefR: an R package to manipulate the iRefIndex consolidated protein interaction database."
authors:
- Mora A
- Donaldson IM
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-455
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- Mice
- Protein Interaction Maps
- "Proteins/chemistry, metabolism"
- Rats
- Reproducibility of Results
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# iRefR: an R package to manipulate the iRefIndex consolidated protein interaction database.
**Authors:** Mora A, Donaldson IM
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2105-12-455](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-455)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Nov 24;12:455. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-455.

iRefR: an R package to manipulate the iRefIndex consolidated protein interaction 
database.

Mora A(1), Donaldson IM.

Author information:
(1)Department for Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, P,O, Box 1041 
Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The iRefIndex addresses the need to consolidate protein interaction 
data into a single uniform data resource. iRefR provides the user with access to 
this data source from an R environment.
RESULTS: The iRefR package includes tools for selecting specific subsets of 
interest from the iRefIndex by criteria such as organism, source database, 
experimental method, protein accessions and publication identifier. Data may be 
converted between three representations (MITAB, edgeList and graph) for use with 
other R packages such as igraph, graph and RBGL.The user may choose between 
different methods for resolving redundancies in interaction data and how n-ary 
data is represented. In addition, we describe a function to identify binary 
interaction records that possibly represent protein complexes. We show that the 
user choice of data selection, redundancy resolution and n-ary data 
representation all have an impact on graphical analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The package allows the user to control how these issues are dealt 
with and communicate them via an R-script written using the iRefR package - this 
will facilitate communication of methods, reproducibility of network analyses 
and further modification and comparison of methods by researchers.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-455
PMCID: PMC3282787
PMID: 22115179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]