---
reference_id: PMID:18817563
title: An ontology for Xenopus anatomy and development.
authors:
- Segerdell E
- Bowes JB
- Pollet N
- Vize PD
journal: BMC Dev Biol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-92
keywords:
- Anatomy
- Animals
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/anatomy & histology, embryology"
- Terminology as Topic
- "Xenopus laevis/anatomy & histology, genetics, growth & development"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An ontology for Xenopus anatomy and development.
**Authors:** Segerdell E, Bowes JB, Pollet N, Vize PD
**Journal:** BMC Dev Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-213X-8-92](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-213X-8-92)

## Content

1. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 25;8:92. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-92.

An ontology for Xenopus anatomy and development.

Segerdell E(1), Bowes JB, Pollet N, Vize PD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada. esegerde@ucalgary.ca

BACKGROUND: The frogs Xenopus laevis and Xenopus (Silurana) tropicalis are model 
systems that have produced a wealth of genetic, genomic, and developmental 
information. Xenbase is a model organism database that provides centralized 
access to this information, including gene function data from high-throughput 
screens and the scientific literature. A controlled, structured vocabulary for 
Xenopus anatomy and development is essential for organizing these data.
RESULTS: We have constructed a Xenopus anatomical ontology that represents the 
lineage of tissues and the timing of their development. We have classified many 
anatomical features in a common framework that has been adopted by several model 
organism database communities. The ontology is available for download at the 
Open Biomedical Ontologies Foundry http://obofoundry.org.
CONCLUSION: The Xenopus Anatomical Ontology will be used to annotate Xenopus 
gene expression patterns and mutant and morphant phenotypes. Its robust 
developmental map will enable powerful database searches and data analyses. We 
encourage community recommendations for updates and improvements to the 
ontology.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-92
PMCID: PMC2561031
PMID: 18817563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]