---
reference_id: PMID:35166825
title: "Zebrafish information network, the knowledgebase for Danio rerio research."
authors:
- Bradford YM
- Van Slyke CE
- Ruzicka L
- Singer A
- Eagle A
- Fashena D
- Howe DG
- Frazer K
- Martin R
- Paddock H
- Pich C
- Ramachandran S
- Westerfield M
journal: Genetics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyac016
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Ontology
- Genome
- Genomics
- Zebrafish/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zebrafish information network, the knowledgebase for Danio rerio research.
**Authors:** Bradford YM, Van Slyke CE, Ruzicka L, Singer A, Eagle A, Fashena D, Howe DG, Frazer K, Martin R, Paddock H, Pich C, Ramachandran S, Westerfield M
**Journal:** Genetics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/iyac016](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac016)

## Content

1. Genetics. 2022 Apr 4;220(4):iyac016. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyac016.

Zebrafish information network, the knowledgebase for Danio rerio research.

Bradford YM(1), Van Slyke CE(1), Ruzicka L(1), Singer A(1), Eagle A(1), Fashena 
D(1), Howe DG(1), Frazer K(1), Martin R(1), Paddock H(1), Pich C(1), 
Ramachandran S(1), Westerfield M(1).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1254, 
USA.

The Zebrafish Information Network (zfin.org) is the central repository for Danio 
rerio genetic and genomic data. The Zebrafish Information Network has served the 
zebrafish research community since 1994, expertly curating, integrating, and 
displaying zebrafish data. Key data types available at the Zebrafish Information 
Network include, but are not limited to, genes, alleles, human disease models, 
gene expression, phenotype, and gene function. The Zebrafish Information Network 
makes zebrafish research data Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable 
through nomenclature, curatorial and annotation activities, web interfaces, and 
data downloads. Recently, the Zebrafish Information Network and 6 other model 
organism knowledgebases have collaborated to form the Alliance of Genome 
Resources, aiming to develop sustainable genome information resources that 
enable the use of model organisms to understand the genetic and genomic basis of 
human biology and disease. Here, we provide an overview of the data available at 
the Zebrafish Information Network including recent updates to the gene page to 
provide access to single-cell RNA sequencing data, links to Alliance web pages, 
ribbon diagrams to summarize the biological systems and Gene Ontology terms that 
have annotations, and data integration with the Alliance of Genome Resources.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics 
Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac016
PMCID: PMC8982015
PMID: 35166825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]