---
reference_id: PMID:35058462
title: "ICEO, a biological ontology for representing and analyzing bacterial integrative and conjugative elements."
authors:
- Liu M
- Liu J
- Liu G
- Wang H
- Wang X
- Deng Z
- He Y
- Ou HY
journal: Sci Data
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41597-021-01112-5
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- "Conjugation, Genetic"
- DNA Transposable Elements
- "Gene Transfer, Horizontal"
- Klebsiella pneumoniae
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ICEO, a biological ontology for representing and analyzing bacterial integrative and conjugative elements.
**Authors:** Liu M, Liu J, Liu G, Wang H, Wang X, Deng Z, He Y, Ou HY
**Journal:** Sci Data (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41597-021-01112-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-021-01112-5)

## Content

1. Sci Data. 2022 Jan 20;9(1):11. doi: 10.1038/s41597-021-01112-5.

ICEO, a biological ontology for representing and analyzing bacterial integrative 
and conjugative elements.

Liu M(#)(1), Liu J(#)(2), Liu G(1), Wang H(3), Wang X(2), Deng Z(1), He Y(4), Ou 
HY(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Laboratory 
on Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences & Biotechnology, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pathogens and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of 
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, 100071, China.
(4)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. 
yongqunh@med.umich.edu.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Laboratory 
on Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences & Biotechnology, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China. hyou@sjtu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Funct Integr Genomics. 2022 Dec;22(6):1139-1145. doi: 
10.1007/s10142-022-00903-2.

Bacterial integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs) are highly modular mobile 
genetic elements critical to the horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance 
and virulence factor genes. To better understand and analyze the ongoing 
increase of ICEs, we developed an Integrative and Conjugative Element Ontology 
(ICEO) to represent the gene components, functional modules, and other 
information of experimentally verified ICEs. ICEO is aligned with the 
upper-level Basic Formal Ontology and reuses existing reliable ontologies. There 
are 31,081 terms, including 26,814 classes from 14 ontologies and 4128 
ICEO-specific classes, representing the information of 271 known experimentally 
verified ICEs from 235 bacterial strains in ICEO currently and 311 predicted 
ICEs of 272 completely sequenced Klebsiella pneumoniae strains. Three ICEO use 
cases were illustrated to investigate complex joins of ICEs and their harboring 
antibiotic resistance or virulence factor genes by using SPARQL or DL query. 
ICEO has been approved as an Open Biomedical Ontology library ontology. It may 
be dedicated to facilitating systematical ICE knowledge representation, 
integration, and computer-assisted queries.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-021-01112-5
PMCID: PMC8776819
PMID: 35058462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.