---
reference_id: PMID:34755882
title: The Human Disease Ontology 2022 update.
authors:
- Schriml LM
- Munro JB
- Schor M
- Olley D
- McCracken C
- Felix V
- Baron JA
- Jackson R
- Bello SM
- Bearer C
- Lichenstein R
- Bisordi K
- Dialo NC
- Giglio M
- Greene C
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1063
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/classification, genetics"
- Genomics/classification
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Human Disease Ontology 2022 update.
**Authors:** Schriml LM, Munro JB, Schor M, Olley D, McCracken C, Felix V, Baron JA, Jackson R, Bello SM, Bearer C, Lichenstein R, Bisordi K, Dialo NC, Giglio M, Greene C
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab1063](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1063)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D1255-D1261. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1063.

The Human Disease Ontology 2022 update.

Schriml LM(1), Munro JB(1), Schor M(1), Olley D(1), McCracken C(1), Felix V(1), 
Baron JA(1), Jackson R(2), Bello SM(3), Bearer C(4), Lichenstein R(5), Bisordi 
K(5), Dialo NC(6), Giglio M(1), Greene C(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Institute for Genome Sciences, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Bend Informatics LLC, Bend, OR, USA.
(3)Mouse Genome Informatics, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA.
(4)Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Internal Medicine Resident, PGY-1, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, USA.

The Human Disease Ontology (DO) (www.disease-ontology.org) database, has 
significantly expanded the disease content and enhanced our userbase and website 
since the DO's 2018 Nucleic Acids Research DATABASE issue paper. Conservatively, 
based on available resource statistics, terms from the DO have been annotated to 
over 1.5 million biomedical data elements and citations, a 10× increase in the 
past 5 years. The DO, funded as a NHGRI Genomic Resource, plays a key role in 
disease knowledge organization, representation, and standardization, serving as 
a reference framework for multiscale biomedical data integration and analysis 
across thousands of clinical, biomedical and computational research projects and 
genomic resources around the world. This update reports on the addition of 1,793 
new disease terms, a 14% increase of textual definitions and the integration of 
22 137 new SubClassOf axioms defining disease to disease connections 
representing the DO's complex disease classification. The DO's updated website 
provides multifaceted etiology searching, enhanced documentation and educational 
resources.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1063
PMCID: PMC8728220
PMID: 34755882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]