---
reference_id: PMID:29592813
title: Cancer Genome Interpreter annotates the biological and clinical relevance of tumor alterations.
authors:
- Tamborero D
- Rubio-Perez C
- Deu-Pons J
- Schroeder MP
- Vivancos A
- Rovira A
- Tusquets I
- Albanell J
- Rodon J
- Tabernero J
- de Torres C
- Dienstmann R
- Gonzalez-Perez A
- Lopez-Bigas N
journal: Genome Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13073-018-0531-8
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genes, Neoplasm"
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cancer Genome Interpreter annotates the biological and clinical relevance of tumor alterations.
**Authors:** Tamborero D, Rubio-Perez C, Deu-Pons J, Schroeder MP, Vivancos A, Rovira A, Tusquets I, Albanell J, Rodon J, Tabernero J, de Torres C, Dienstmann R, Gonzalez-Perez A, Lopez-Bigas N
**Journal:** Genome Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13073-018-0531-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-018-0531-8)

## Content

1. Genome Med. 2018 Mar 28;10(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s13073-018-0531-8.

Cancer Genome Interpreter annotates the biological and clinical relevance of 
tumor alterations.

Tamborero D(1)(2), Rubio-Perez C(1), Deu-Pons J(1)(2), Schroeder MP(1)(3), 
Vivancos A(4), Rovira A(5)(6), Tusquets I(5)(6)(7), Albanell J(5)(6)(8), Rodon 
J(4), Tabernero J(4), de Torres C(9), Dienstmann R(4), Gonzalez-Perez A(1)(2), 
Lopez-Bigas N(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Research Program on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), IMIM Hospital del Mar 
Medical, Research Institute and Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Oncology, Hospital del Mar- CIBERONC, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory, Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica- 
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Research Program on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), IMIM Hospital del Mar 
Medical, Research Institute and Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain. 
nuria.lopez@irbbarcelona.org.
(11)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona 
Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. 
nuria.lopez@irbbarcelona.org.
(12)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. 
nuria.lopez@irbbarcelona.org.

While tumor genome sequencing has become widely available in clinical and 
research settings, the interpretation of tumor somatic variants remains an 
important bottleneck. Here we present the Cancer Genome Interpreter, a versatile 
platform that automates the interpretation of newly sequenced cancer genomes, 
annotating the potential of alterations detected in tumors to act as drivers and 
their possible effect on treatment response. The results are organized in 
different levels of evidence according to current knowledge, which we envision 
can support a broad range of oncology use cases. The resource is publicly 
available at http://www.cancergenomeinterpreter.org .

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-018-0531-8
PMCID: PMC5875005
PMID: 29592813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: JR has 
consulting or advisory roles in Novartis, Eli Lilly, Orion Pharma, SERVIER, MSD, 
and Peptomyc and receives research funding from Bayer and Novartis. All 
remaining authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S 
NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.