---
reference_id: PMID:34601570
title: "The fobitools framework: the first steps towards food enrichment analysis."
authors:
- Castellano-Escuder P
- Andrés-Lacueva C
- Sánchez-Pla A
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab626
keywords:
- Humans
- Software
- Research Personnel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The fobitools framework: the first steps towards food enrichment analysis.
**Authors:** Castellano-Escuder P, Andrés-Lacueva C, Sánchez-Pla A
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/btab626](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab626)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2021 Nov 5;37(21):3969-3971. doi: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/btab626.

The fobitools framework: the first steps towards food enrichment analysis.

Castellano-Escuder P(1)(2)(3), Andrés-Lacueva C(1)(3), Sánchez-Pla A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biomarkers and Nutritional & Food Metabolomics Research Group, Department of 
Nutrition, Food Science and Gastronomy, Food Innovation Network (XIA), 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Statistics and Bioinformatics Research Group, Department of Genetics, 
Microbiology and Statistics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)CIBERFES, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

MOTIVATION: The FOBI ontology can be of great help in nutrimetabolomic studies 
due to its wide variety of applications, including the possibility of performing 
different enrichment analyses. However, the programming skills required to query 
and explore it may limit its use by the scientific community.
RESULTS: Here, we present the fobitools framework, comprised of an 
R/Bioconductor package and its complementary web interface. These two tools 
allow researchers to interact and explore the FOBI ontology in a highly 
user-friendly way. The fobitools framework is focused on the novel concept of 
food enrichment analysis in nutrimetabolomic studies. However, other useful 
features, such as the network interactive visualization of FOBI and the 
automatic annotation of dietary free-text data are also presented.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Both the fobitools R/Bioconductor package and 
the fobitoolsGUI web-based application, together with their installation 
instructions and examples, are freely available at 
https://github.com/nutrimetabolomics/fobitools and 
https://github.com/nutrimetabolomics/fobitoolsGUI, respectively.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab626
PMID: 34601570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]