---
reference_id: PMID:32024557
title: "Adolescent residential mobility, genetic liability and risk of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depression."
authors:
- Paksarian D
- Trabjerg BB
- Merikangas KR
- Mors O
- Børglum AD
- Hougaard DM
- Nordentoft M
- Werge T
- Pedersen CB
- Mortensen PB
- Agerbo E
- Horsdal HT
journal: Br J Psychiatry
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1192/bjp.2020.8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bipolar Disorder/epidemiology, genetics"
- Child
- Cohort Studies
- "Major Depressive Disorder/epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- "Housing/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Meta-Analysis as Topic
- Odds Ratio
- Parents/psychology
- Population Dynamics
- "Schizophrenia/epidemiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adolescent residential mobility, genetic liability and risk of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depression.
**Authors:** Paksarian D, Trabjerg BB, Merikangas KR, Mors O, Børglum AD, Hougaard DM, Nordentoft M, Werge T, Pedersen CB, Mortensen PB, Agerbo E, Horsdal HT
**Journal:** Br J Psychiatry (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1192/bjp.2020.8](https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2020.8)

## Content

1. Br J Psychiatry. 2020 Jul;217(1):390-396. doi: 10.1192/bjp.2020.8.

Adolescent residential mobility, genetic liability and risk of schizophrenia, 
bipolar disorder and major depression.

Paksarian D(1), Trabjerg BB(2), Merikangas KR(1), Mors O(3), Børglum AD(4), 
Hougaard DM(5), Nordentoft M(6), Werge T(7), Pedersen CB(8), Mortensen PB(2), 
Agerbo E(2), Horsdal HT(9).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Mental Health, Maryland, USA.
(2)National Center for Register-Based Research, Business and Social Sciences, 
Aarhus University; The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative 
Psychiatric Research; and Centre for Integrated Register-Based Research, Aarhus 
University, Denmark.
(3)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research; and 
Psychosis Research Unit, Aarhus University Hospital - Psychiatry, Denmark.
(4)The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research; 
Department of Biomedicine and Centre for Integrative Sequencing, iSEQ, Aarhus 
University; and Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Denmark.
(5)Danish Center for Neonatal Screening, Statens Serum Institut, Denmark.
(6)Copenhagen Research Centre for Mental Health, Mental Health Centre 
Copenhagen, Capital Region of Denmark, Copenhagen University Hospital; and The 
Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, Denmark.
(7)Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Services Copenhagen; 
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen; and The Lundbeck 
Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, Denmark.
(8)National Center for Register-Based Research, Business and Social Sciences, 
Aarhus University; The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative 
Psychiatric Research; Centre for Integrated Register-Based Research, Aarhus 
University, Denmark.
(9)National Center for Register-Based Research, Business and Social Sciences, 
Aarhus University; and The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative 
Psychiatric Research, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Residential mobility during upbringing, and especially adolescence, 
is associated with multiple negative mental health outcomes. However, whether 
associations are confounded by unmeasured familial factors, including genetic 
liability, is unclear.
AIMS: We used a population-based case-cohort study to assess whether polygenic 
risk scores (PRSs) for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depression were 
associated with mobility from ages 10-14 years, and whether PRS and parental 
history of mental disorder together explained associations between mobility and 
each disorder.
METHOD: Information on cases (n = 4207 schizophrenia, n = 1402 bipolar disorder, 
n = 18 215 major depression) and a random population sample (n = 17 582), born 
1981-1997, was linked between Danish civil and psychiatric registries. 
Genome-wide data were obtained from the Danish Neonatal Screening Biobank and 
PRSs were calculated based on results of separate, large meta-analyses.
RESULTS: PRSs for schizophrenia and major depression were weakly associated with 
moving once (odds ratio 1.07, 95% CI 1.00-1.16; and odds ratio 1.10, 95% CI 
1.04-1.17, respectively), but not twice or three or more times. Mobility was 
positively associated with each disorder, with more moves associated with 
greater risk. Adjustment for PRS produced slight reductions in the magnitude of 
associations. Adjustment for PRS and parental history of mental disorder 
together reduced estimates by 5-11%. In fully adjusted models mobility was 
associated with all three disorders; hazard ratios ranged from 1.33 (95% CI 
1.08-1.62; one move and bipolar disorder) to 3.05 (95% CI 1.92-4.86; three or 
more moves and bipolar disorder).
CONCLUSIONS: Associations of mobility with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and 
depression do not appear to be attributable to genetic liability as measured 
here. Potential familial confounding of mobility associations may be 
predominantly environmental in nature.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.2020.8
PMCID: PMC8130005
PMID: 32024557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest None.