---
reference_id: PMID:30423142
title: "miRBase: from microRNA sequences to function."
authors:
- Kozomara A
- Birgaoanu M
- Griffiths-Jones S
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1141
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology/methods
- Data Mining
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Gene Ontology
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Web Browser
content_type: abstract_only
---

# miRBase: from microRNA sequences to function.
**Authors:** Kozomara A, Birgaoanu M, Griffiths-Jones S
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky1141](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1141)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D155-D162. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1141.

miRBase: from microRNA sequences to function.

Kozomara A(1), Birgaoanu M(1), Griffiths-Jones S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

miRBase catalogs, names and distributes microRNA gene sequences. The latest 
release of miRBase (v22) contains microRNA sequences from 271 organisms: 38 589 
hairpin precursors and 48 860 mature microRNAs. We describe improvements to the 
database and website to provide more information about the quality of microRNA 
gene annotations, and the cellular functions of their products. We have 
collected 1493 small RNA deep sequencing datasets and mapped a total of 5.5 
billion reads to microRNA sequences. The read mapping patterns provide strong 
support for the validity of between 20% and 65% of microRNA annotations in 
different well-studied animal genomes, and evidence for the removal of >200 
sequences from the database. To improve the availability of microRNA functional 
information, we are disseminating Gene Ontology terms annotated against miRBase 
sequences. We have also used a text-mining approach to search for microRNA gene 
names in the full-text of open access articles. Over 500 000 sentences from 18 
542 papers contain microRNA names. We score these sentences for functional 
information and link them with 12 519 microRNA entries. The sentences 
themselves, and word clouds built from them, provide effective summaries of the 
functional information about specific microRNAs. miRBase is publicly and freely 
available at http://mirbase.org/.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1141
PMCID: PMC6323917
PMID: 30423142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]