---
reference_id: PMID:37460679
title: Toxicology knowledge graph for structural birth defects.
authors:
- Evangelista JE
- Clarke DJB
- Xie Z
- Marino GB
- Utti V
- Jenkins SL
- Ahooyi TM
- Bologa CG
- Yang JJ
- Binder JL
- Kumar P
- Lambert CG
- Grethe JS
- Wenger E
- Taylor D
- Oprea TI
- de Bono B
- "Ma'ayan A"
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00329-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxicology knowledge graph for structural birth defects.
**Authors:** Evangelista JE, Clarke DJB, Xie Z, Marino GB, Utti V, Jenkins SL, Ahooyi TM, Bologa CG, Yang JJ, Binder JL, Kumar P, Lambert CG, Grethe JS, Wenger E, Taylor D, Oprea TI, de Bono B, Ma'ayan A
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-023-00329-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-023-00329-2)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2023 Jul 17;3(1):98. doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00329-2.

Toxicology knowledge graph for structural birth defects.

Evangelista JE(#)(1), Clarke DJB(#)(1), Xie Z(1), Marino GB(1), Utti V(1), 
Jenkins SL(1), Ahooyi TM(2), Bologa CG(3), Yang JJ(3), Binder JL(3), Kumar P(3), 
Lambert CG(3), Grethe JS(4), Wenger E(2), Taylor D(2), Oprea TI(3), de Bono 
B(5), Ma'ayan A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Mount Sinai Center for 
Bioinformatics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, 
USA.
(2)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Biomedical and Health 
Informatics; Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Translational Informatics, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 87131, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
92093, USA.
(5)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(6)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Mount Sinai Center for 
Bioinformatics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, 
USA. avi.maayan@mssm.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Birth defects are functional and structural abnormalities that 
impact about 1 in 33 births in the United States. They have been attributed to 
genetic and other factors such as drugs, cosmetics, food, and environmental 
pollutants during pregnancy, but for most birth defects there are no known 
causes.
METHODS: To further characterize associations between small molecule compounds 
and their potential to induce specific birth abnormalities, we gathered 
knowledge from multiple sources to construct a reproductive toxicity Knowledge 
Graph (ReproTox-KG) with a focus on associations between birth defects, drugs, 
and genes. Specifically, we gathered data from drug/birth-defect associations 
from co-mentions in published abstracts, gene/birth-defect associations from 
genetic studies, drug- and preclinical-compound-induced gene expression changes 
in cell lines, known drug targets, genetic burden scores for human genes, and 
placental crossing scores for small molecules.
RESULTS: Using ReproTox-KG and semi-supervised learning (SSL), we scored >30,000 
preclinical small molecules for their potential to cross the placenta and induce 
birth defects, and identified >500 birth-defect/gene/drug cliques that can be 
used to explain molecular mechanisms for drug-induced birth defects. The 
ReproTox-KG can be accessed via a web-based user interface available at 
https://maayanlab.cloud/reprotox-kg . This site enables users to explore the 
associations between birth defects, approved and preclinical drugs, and all 
human genes.
CONCLUSIONS: ReproTox-KG provides a resource for exploring knowledge about the 
molecular mechanisms of birth defects with the potential of predicting the 
likelihood of genes and preclinical small molecules to induce birth defects.

Plain Language Summary: While birth defects are common, for most birth defects 
there are no known causes. During pregnancy, developing babies are exposed to 
drugs, cosmetics, food, and environmental pollutants that may cause birth 
defects. However, exactly how these environmental factors are involved in 
producing birth defects is difficult to discern. Also, birth defects can be a 
consequence of the genes inherited from the parents. We combined general data 
about human genes and drugs with specific data previously implicating genes and 
drugs in inducing birth defects to create a knowledge graph representation that 
connects genes, drugs, and birth defects. This knowledge graph can be used to 
explore new links that may explain why birth defects occur, particularly those 
that result from a combination of inherited and environmental influences.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-023-00329-2
PMCID: PMC10352311
PMID: 37460679

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.