---
reference_id: PMID:20157474
title: New mutant phenotype data curation system in the Saccharomyces Genome Database.
authors:
- Costanzo MC
- Skrzypek MS
- Nash R
- Wong E
- Binkley G
- Engel SR
- Hitz B
- Hong EL
- Cherry JM
- the Saccharomyces Genome Database Project
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/database/bap001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New mutant phenotype data curation system in the Saccharomyces Genome Database.
**Authors:** Costanzo MC, Skrzypek MS, Nash R, Wong E, Binkley G, Engel SR, Hitz B, Hong EL, Cherry JM, the Saccharomyces Genome Database Project
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bap001](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bap001)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2009;2009:bap001. doi: 10.1093/database/bap001. Epub 2009
Mar  16.

New mutant phenotype data curation system in the Saccharomyces Genome Database.

Costanzo MC(1), Skrzypek MS, Nash R, Wong E, Binkley G, Engel SR, Hitz B, Hong 
EL, Cherry JM; the Saccharomyces Genome Database Project.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305-5120 and Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Carl Icahn 
Laboratory, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

The Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; http://www.yeastgenome.org/) organizes 
and displays molecular and genetic information about the genes and proteins of 
baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutant phenotype screens have been the 
starting point for a large proportion of yeast molecular biological studies, and 
are still used today to elucidate the functions of uncharacterized genes and 
discover new roles for previously studied genes. To greatly facilitate searching 
and comparison of mutant phenotypes across genes, we have devised a new 
controlled-vocabulary system for capturing phenotype information. Each phenotype 
annotation is represented as an 'observable', which is the entity, or process 
that is observed, and a 'qualifier' that describes the change in that entity or 
process in the mutant (e.g. decreased, increased, or abnormal). Additional 
information about the mutant, such as strain background, allele name, conditions 
under which the phenotype is observed, or the identity of relevant chemicals, is 
captured in separate fields. For each gene, a summary of the mutant phenotype 
information is displayed on the Locus Summary page, and the complete information 
is displayed in tabular format on the Phenotype Details Page. All of the 
information is searchable and may also be downloaded in bulk using SGD's Batch 
Download Tool or Download Data Files Page. In the future, phenotypes will be 
integrated with other curated data to allow searching across different types of 
functional information, such as genetic and physical interaction data and Gene 
Ontology annotations.Database URL:http://www.yeastgenome.org/

DOI: 10.1093/database/bap001
PMCID: PMC2790299
PMID: 20157474