---
reference_id: PMID:18360535
title: "The foundational model of anatomy in OWL: Experience and perspectives."
authors:
- Golbreich C
- Zhang S
- Bodenreider O
journal: Web Semant
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The foundational model of anatomy in OWL: Experience and perspectives.
**Authors:** Golbreich C, Zhang S, Bodenreider O
**Journal:** Web Semant (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.007)

## Content

1. Web Semant. 2006;4(3):181-195. doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.007.

The foundational model of anatomy in OWL: Experience and perspectives.

Golbreich C(1), Zhang S, Bodenreider O.

Author information:
(1)LIM, University Rennes 1, 35043 Rennes, France.

We present the method developed for migrating the Foundational Model of Anatomy 
(FMA) from its representation with frames in Protégé to its logical 
representation in OWL and our experience in reasoning with it. Despite the 
extensive use of metaclasses in Protégé, it proved possible to convert the FMA 
from Protégé into OWL DL, while capturing most of its original features. The 
conversion relies on a set of translation and enrichment rules implemented with 
flexible options. Unsurprisingly, reasoning with the FMA in OWL proved to be a 
real challenge, due to its sheer size and complexity, and raised significant 
inference problems in terms of time and memory requirements. However, various 
smaller versions have been successfully handled by Racer. Some inconsistencies 
were identified and several classes reclassified. The results obtained so far 
show the advantage of OWL DL over frames and, more generally, the usefulness of 
DLs reasoners for building and maintaining the large-scale biomedical ontologies 
of the future Semantic Web.

DOI: 10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.007
PMCID: PMC2270940
PMID: 18360535