---
reference_id: PMID:23972281
title: "EMAP/EMAPA ontology of mouse developmental anatomy: 2013 update."
authors:
- Hayamizu TF
- Wicks MN
- Davidson DR
- Burger A
- Ringwald M
- Baldock RA
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EMAP/EMAPA ontology of mouse developmental anatomy: 2013 update.
**Authors:** Hayamizu TF, Wicks MN, Davidson DR, Burger A, Ringwald M, Baldock RA
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-15](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-15)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Aug 26;4(1):15. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-15.

EMAP/EMAPA ontology of mouse developmental anatomy: 2013 update.

Hayamizu TF(1), Wicks MN, Davidson DR, Burger A, Ringwald M, Baldock RA.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, USA. Terry.Hayamizu@jax.org.

BACKGROUND: The Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project (EMAP) ontology of mouse 
developmental anatomy provides a standard nomenclature for describing normal and 
mutant mouse embryo anatomy. The ontology forms the core of the EMAP atlas and 
is used for annotating gene expression data by the mouse Gene Expression 
Database (GXD), Edinburgh Mouse Atlas of Gene Expression (EMAGE) and other 
database resources.
FINDINGS: The original EMAP ontology listed anatomical entities for each 
developmental stage separately, presented as uniparental graphs organized as a 
strict partonomy. An "abstract" (i.e. non-stage-specific) representation of 
mouse developmental anatomy has since been developed. In this version (EMAPA) 
all instances for a given anatomical entity are presented as a single term, 
together with the first and last stage at which it is considered to be present. 
Timed-component anatomies are now derived using staging information in the 
"primary" non-timed version. Anatomical entities are presented as a directed 
acyclic graph enabling multiple parental relationships. Subsumption 
classification as well as partonomic and other types of relationships can now be 
represented. Most concept names are unique, with compound names constructed 
using standardized nomenclature conventions, and alternative names associated as 
synonyms.
CONCLUSIONS: The ontology has been extended and refined in a collaborative 
effort between EMAP and GXD, with additional input from others. Efforts are also 
underway to improve the revision process with regards to updating and editorial 
control. The revised EMAPA ontology is freely available from the OBO Foundry 
resource, with descriptive information and other documentation presented in 
associated Wiki pages 
(http://www.obofoundry.org/wiki/index.php/EMAPA:Main_Page).

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-15
PMCID: PMC3851555
PMID: 23972281