---
reference_id: PMID:36243972
title: "Genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2023."
authors:
- Seal RL
- Braschi B
- Gray K
- Jones TEM
- Tweedie S
- Haim-Vilmovsky L
- Bruford EA
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac888
keywords:
- Humans
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Genome
- Genomics
- Proteomics
- Pseudogenes
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2023.
**Authors:** Seal RL, Braschi B, Gray K, Jones TEM, Tweedie S, Haim-Vilmovsky L, Bruford EA
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac888](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac888)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D1003-D1009. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac888.

Genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2023.

Seal RL(1)(2), Braschi B(1), Gray K(1)(2), Jones TEM(1), Tweedie S(1), 
Haim-Vilmovsky L(1), Bruford EA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK.
(2)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge School of Clinical 
Medicine, Cambridge CB2 0PT, UK.

The HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) assigns unique symbols and names to 
human genes. The HGNC database (www.genenames.org) currently contains over 43 
000 approved gene symbols, over 19 200 of which are assigned to protein-coding 
genes, 14 000 to pseudogenes and nearly 9000 to non-coding RNA genes. The public 
website, www.genenames.org, displays all approved nomenclature within Symbol 
Reports that contain data curated by HGNC nomenclature advisors and links to 
related genomic, clinical, and proteomic information. Here, we describe updates 
to our resource, including improvements to our search facility and new download 
features.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac888
PMCID: PMC9825485
PMID: 36243972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]