---
reference_id: PMID:27899649
title: "Protein Ontology (PRO): enhancing and scaling up the representation of protein entities."
authors:
- Natale DA
- Arighi CN
- Blake JA
- Bona J
- Chen C
- Chen SC
- Christie KR
- Cowart J
- "D'Eustachio P"
- Diehl AD
- Drabkin HJ
- Duncan WD
- Huang H
- Ren J
- Ross K
- Ruttenberg A
- Shamovsky V
- Smith B
- Wang Q
- Zhang J
- El-Sayed A
- Wu CH
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1075
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Humans
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Web Browser
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein Ontology (PRO): enhancing and scaling up the representation of protein entities.
**Authors:** Natale DA, Arighi CN, Blake JA, Bona J, Chen C, Chen SC, Christie KR, Cowart J, D'Eustachio P, Diehl AD, Drabkin HJ, Duncan WD, Huang H, Ren J, Ross K, Ruttenberg A, Shamovsky V, Smith B, Wang Q, Zhang J, El-Sayed A, Wu CH
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkw1075](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1075)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 4;45(D1):D339-D346. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1075. Epub
 2016 Nov 28.

Protein Ontology (PRO): enhancing and scaling up the representation of protein 
entities.

Natale DA(1), Arighi CN(2), Blake JA(3), Bona J(4), Chen C(2), Chen SC(2), 
Christie KR(3), Cowart J(2), D'Eustachio P(5), Diehl AD(6)(7), Drabkin HJ(3), 
Duncan WD(8)(7), Huang H(2), Ren J(2), Ross K(9), Ruttenberg A(4), Shamovsky 
V(5), Smith B(10), Wang Q(2), Zhang J(9), El-Sayed A(9), Wu CH(9)(2).

Author information:
(1)Protein Information Resource, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington, DC 20007, USA dan5@georgetown.edu.
(2)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE 19711, USA.
(3)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
(4)Oral Diagnostic Sciences, University at Buffalo School of Dental Medicine, 
Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, NYU School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10016, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(7)New York State Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(8)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(9)Protein Information Resource, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington, DC 20007, USA.
(10)National Center for Ontological Research, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 
14214, USA.

The Protein Ontology (PRO; http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/pr) formally defines 
and describes taxon-specific and taxon-neutral protein-related entities in three 
major areas: proteins related by evolution; proteins produced from a given gene; 
and protein-containing complexes. PRO thus serves as a tool for referencing 
protein entities at any level of specificity. To enhance this ability, and to 
facilitate the comparison of such entities described in different resources, we 
developed a standardized representation of proteoforms using UniProtKB as a 
sequence reference and PSI-MOD as a post-translational modification reference. 
We illustrate its use in facilitating an alignment between PRO and Reactome 
protein entities. We also address issues of scalability, describing our first 
steps into the use of text mining to identify protein-related entities, the 
large-scale import of proteoform information from expert curated resources, and 
our ability to dynamically generate PRO terms. Web views for individual terms 
are now more informative about closely-related terms, including for example an 
interactive multiple sequence alignment. Finally, we describe recent improvement 
in semantic utility, with PRO now represented in OWL and as a SPARQL endpoint. 
These developments will further support the anticipated growth of PRO and 
facilitate discoverability of and allow aggregation of data relating to protein 
entities.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1075
PMCID: PMC5210558
PMID: 27899649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]