---
reference_id: PMID:21143905
title: Foundations for a realist ontology of mental disease.
authors:
- Ceusters W
- Smith B
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-1-10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Foundations for a realist ontology of mental disease.
**Authors:** Ceusters W, Smith B
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-1-10](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-1-10)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2010 Dec 9;1(1):10. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-1-10.

Foundations for a realist ontology of mental disease.

Ceusters W(1), Smith B.

Author information:
(1)Ontology Research Group, Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life 
Sciences, 701 Ellicott street, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA. ceusters@buffalo.edu.

While classifications of mental disorders have existed for over one hundred 
years, it still remains unspecified what terms such as 'mental disorder', 
'disease' and 'illness' might actually denote. While ontologies have been called 
in aid to address this shortfall since the GALEN project of the early 1990s, 
most attempts thus far have sought to provide a formal description of the 
structure of some pre-existing terminology or classification, rather than of the 
corresponding structures and processes on the side of the patient.We here 
present a view of mental disease that is based on ontological realism and which 
follows the principles embodied in Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) and in the 
application of BFO in the Ontology of General Medical Science (OGMS). We 
analyzed statements about what counts as a mental disease provided (1) in the 
research agenda for the DSM-V, and (2) in Pies' model. The results were used to 
assess whether the representational units of BFO and OGMS were adequate as 
foundations for a formal representation of the entities in reality that these 
statements attempt to describe. We then analyzed the representational units 
specific to mental disease and provided corresponding definitions.Our key 
contributions lie in the identification of confusions and conflations in the 
existing terminology of mental disease and in providing what we believe is a 
framework for the sort of clear and unambiguous reference to entities on the 
side of the patient that is needed in order to avoid these confusions in the 
future.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-1-10
PMCID: PMC3017014
PMID: 21143905