---
reference_id: PMID:21037258
title: "miRBase: integrating microRNA annotation and deep-sequencing data."
authors:
- Kozomara A
- Griffiths-Jones S
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1027
keywords:
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- "MicroRNAs/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA"
- Systems Integration
content_type: abstract_only
---

# miRBase: integrating microRNA annotation and deep-sequencing data.
**Authors:** Kozomara A, Griffiths-Jones S
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkq1027](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq1027)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(Database issue):D152-7. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkq1027.  Epub 2010 Oct 30.

miRBase: integrating microRNA annotation and deep-sequencing data.

Kozomara A(1), Griffiths-Jones S.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, 
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

miRBase is the primary online repository for all microRNA sequences and 
annotation. The current release (miRBase 16) contains over 15,000 microRNA gene 
loci in over 140 species, and over 17,000 distinct mature microRNA sequences. 
Deep-sequencing technologies have delivered a sharp rise in the rate of novel 
microRNA discovery. We have mapped reads from short RNA deep-sequencing 
experiments to microRNAs in miRBase and developed web interfaces to view these 
mappings. The user can view all read data associated with a given microRNA 
annotation, filter reads by experiment and count, and search for microRNAs by 
tissue- and stage-specific expression. These data can be used as a proxy for 
relative expression levels of microRNA sequences, provide detailed evidence for 
microRNA annotations and alternative isoforms of mature microRNAs, and allow us 
to revisit previous annotations. miRBase is available online at: 
http://www.mirbase.org/.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq1027
PMCID: PMC3013655
PMID: 21037258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]