---
reference_id: PMID:26244659
title: Spatiotemporal Effects of Supplementary Feeding of Wild Boar (Sus scrofa) on Artificial Ground Nest Depredation.
authors:
- Oja R
- Zilmer K
- Valdmann H
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135254
keywords:
- Animals
- Ecosystem
- Estonia
- Feeding Behavior/physiology
- Geography
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Nesting Behavior/physiology
- Predatory Behavior/physiology
- Risk Assessment/methods
- Risk Factors
- Sus scrofa/physiology
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatiotemporal Effects of Supplementary Feeding of Wild Boar (Sus scrofa) on Artificial Ground Nest Depredation.
**Authors:** Oja R, Zilmer K, Valdmann H
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0135254](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135254)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 5;10(8):e0135254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135254. 
eCollection 2015.

Spatiotemporal Effects of Supplementary Feeding of Wild Boar (Sus scrofa) on 
Artificial Ground Nest Depredation.

Oja R(1), Zilmer K(1), Valdmann H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of 
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

Supplementary feeding of ungulates, being widely used in game management, may 
have unwanted consequences. Its role in agricultural damage is well-studied, but 
few studies have considered the potential for the practice to attract ground 
nest predators. Our goal was to identify the factors influencing ground nest 
predation in the vicinity of year-round supplementary feeding sites for wild 
boar and to characterise their spatiotemporal scope. We conducted two separate 
artificial ground nest experiments in five different hunting districts in 
south-eastern Estonia. The quantity of food provided and distance of a nest from 
the feeding site were the most important factors determining predation risk. 
Larger quantities of food resulted in higher predation risk, while predation 
risk responded in a non-linear fashion to distance from the feeding site. 
Although predation risk eventually decreases if supplementary feeding is ceased 
for at least four years, recently abandoned feeding sites still pose a high 
predation risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135254
PMCID: PMC4526364
PMID: 26244659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.