---
reference_id: PMID:29617745
title: "TISSUES 2.0: an integrative web resource on mammalian tissue expression."
authors:
- Palasca O
- Santos A
- Stolte C
- Gorodkin J
- Jensen LJ
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/database/bay003
keywords:
- Animals
- Data Curation
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Mice
- Organ Specificity
- Rats
- Species Specificity
- Swine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TISSUES 2.0: an integrative web resource on mammalian tissue expression.
**Authors:** Palasca O, Santos A, Stolte C, Gorodkin J, Jensen LJ
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bay003](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bay003)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2018 Jan 1;2018:bay003. doi: 10.1093/database/bay003.

TISSUES 2.0: an integrative web resource on mammalian tissue expression.

Palasca O(1)(2)(3), Santos A(1), Stolte C(4), Gorodkin J(2)(3), Jensen LJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Center for non-coding RNA in Technology and Health, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)New York Genome Center, New York, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    Database (Oxford). 2018 Jan 1;2018. doi: 10.1093/database/bay028.

ABSTRACT: Physiological and molecular similarities between organisms make it 
possible to translate findings from simpler experimental systems—model 
organisms—into more complex ones, such as human. This translation facilitates 
the understanding of biological processes under normal or disease conditions. 
Researchers aiming to identify the similarities and differences between 
organisms at the molecular level need resources collecting multi-organism tissue 
expression data. We have developed a database of gene–tissue associations in 
human, mouse, rat and pig by integrating multiple sources of evidence: 
transcriptomics covering all four species and proteomics (human only), manually 
curated and mined from the scientific literature. Through a scoring scheme, 
these associations are made comparable across all sources of evidence and across 
organisms. Furthermore, the scoring produces a confidence score assigned to each 
of the associations. The TISSUES database (version 2.0) is publicly accessible 
through a user-friendly web interface and as part of the STRING app for 
Cytoscape. In addition, we analyzed the agreement between datasets, across and 
within organisms, and identified that the agreement is mainly affected by the 
quality of the datasets rather than by the technologies used or organisms 
compared.
DATABASE URL: http://tissues.jensenlab.org/

DOI: 10.1093/database/bay003
PMCID: PMC5808782
PMID: 29617745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]