---
reference_id: PMID:30371849
title: "LNCipedia 5: towards a reference set of human long non-coding RNAs."
authors:
- Volders PJ
- Anckaert J
- Verheggen K
- Nuytens J
- Martens L
- Mestdagh P
- Vandesompele J
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1031
keywords:
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Genomics/methods
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics"
- Web Browser
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LNCipedia 5: towards a reference set of human long non-coding RNAs.
**Authors:** Volders PJ, Anckaert J, Verheggen K, Nuytens J, Martens L, Mestdagh P, Vandesompele J
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky1031](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1031)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D135-D139. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1031.

LNCipedia 5: towards a reference set of human long non-coding RNAs.

Volders PJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Anckaert J(1)(2)(4), Verheggen K(3)(4), Nuytens 
J(1)(2)(4), Martens L(3)(4), Mestdagh P(1)(2)(4), Vandesompele J(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Center for Medical Genetics (CMGG), Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

While long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) research in the past has primarily focused on 
the discovery of novel genes, today it has shifted towards functional annotation 
of this large class of genes. With thousands of lncRNA studies published every 
year, the current challenge lies in keeping track of which lncRNAs are 
functionally described. This is further complicated by the fact that lncRNA 
nomenclature is not straightforward and lncRNA annotation is scattered across 
different resources with their own quality metrics and definition of a lncRNA. 
To overcome this issue, large scale curation and annotation is needed. Here, we 
present the fifth release of the human lncRNA database LNCipedia 
(https://lncipedia.org). The most notable improvements include manual literature 
curation of 2482 lncRNA articles and the use of official gene symbols when 
available. In addition, an improved filtering pipeline results in a higher 
quality reference lncRNA gene set.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1031
PMCID: PMC6323963
PMID: 30371849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]