---
reference_id: PMID:34717010
title: "PANTHER: Making genome-scale phylogenetics accessible to all."
authors:
- Thomas PD
- Ebert D
- Muruganujan A
- Mushayahama T
- Albou LP
- Mi H
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/pro.4218
keywords:
- "Databases, Protein"
- "Evolution, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Phylogeny
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, Protein"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PANTHER: Making genome-scale phylogenetics accessible to all.
**Authors:** Thomas PD, Ebert D, Muruganujan A, Mushayahama T, Albou LP, Mi H
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.4218](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.4218)

## Content

1. Protein Sci. 2022 Jan;31(1):8-22. doi: 10.1002/pro.4218. Epub 2021 Nov 25.

PANTHER: Making genome-scale phylogenetics accessible to all.

Thomas PD(1), Ebert D(1), Muruganujan A(1), Mushayahama T(1), Albou LP(1), Mi 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Bioinformatics, Department of Population and Public Health 
Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Phylogenetics is a powerful tool for analyzing protein sequences, by inferring 
their evolutionary relationships to other proteins. However, phylogenetics 
analyses can be challenging: they are computationally expensive and must be 
performed carefully in order to avoid systematic errors and artifacts. Protein 
Analysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER; http://pantherdb.org) is a 
publicly available, user-focused knowledgebase that stores the results of an 
extensive phylogenetic reconstruction pipeline that includes computational and 
manual processes and quality control steps. First, fully reconciled phylogenetic 
trees (including ancestral protein sequences) are reconstructed for a set of 
"reference" protein sequences obtained from fully sequenced genomes of organisms 
across the tree of life. Second, the resulting phylogenetic trees are manually 
reviewed and annotated with function evolution events: inferred gains and losses 
of protein function along branches of the phylogenetic tree. Here, we describe 
in detail the current contents of PANTHER, how those contents are generated, and 
how they can be used in a variety of applications. The PANTHER knowledgebase can 
be downloaded or accessed via an extensive API. In addition, PANTHER provides 
software tools to facilitate the application of the knowledgebase to common 
protein sequence analysis tasks: exploring an annotated genome by gene function; 
performing "enrichment analysis" of lists of genes; annotating a single sequence 
or large batch of sequences by homology; and assessing the likelihood that a 
genetic variant at a particular site in a protein will have deleterious effects.

© 2021 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.4218
PMCID: PMC8740835
PMID: 34717010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]