---
reference_id: PMID:32440005
title: Extending the small-molecule similarity principle to all levels of biology with the Chemical Checker.
authors:
- Duran-Frigola M
- Pauls E
- Guitart-Pla O
- Bertoni M
- Alcalde V
- Amat D
- Juan-Blanco T
- Aloy P
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-0502-7
keywords:
- "Biological Products/chemistry, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Biomarkers, Pharmacological/metabolism"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug Discovery
- Drug Therapy
- Humans
- "Pharmaceutical Preparations/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Small Molecule Libraries/chemistry, metabolism, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extending the small-molecule similarity principle to all levels of biology with the Chemical Checker.
**Authors:** Duran-Frigola M, Pauls E, Guitart-Pla O, Bertoni M, Alcalde V, Amat D, Juan-Blanco T, Aloy P
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41587-020-0502-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0502-7)

## Content

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2020 Sep;38(9):1087-1096. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-0502-7. Epub
 2020 May 18.

Extending the small-molecule similarity principle to all levels of biology with 
the Chemical Checker.

Duran-Frigola M(#)(1), Pauls E(#)(2), Guitart-Pla O(2), Bertoni M(2), Alcalde 
V(2), Amat D(2), Juan-Blanco T(2), Aloy P(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Joint IRB-BSC-CRG Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 
Barcelona, Spain. miquel.duran@irbbarcelona.org.
(2)Joint IRB-BSC-CRG Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Joint IRB-BSC-CRG Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 
Barcelona, Spain. patrick.aloy@irbbarcelona.org.
(4)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. 
patrick.aloy@irbbarcelona.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2020 Sep;38(9):1098. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-0564-6.

Small molecules are usually compared by their chemical structure, but there is 
no unified analytic framework for representing and comparing their biological 
activity. We present the Chemical Checker (CC), which provides processed, 
harmonized and integrated bioactivity data on ~800,000 small molecules. The CC 
divides data into five levels of increasing complexity, from the chemical 
properties of compounds to their clinical outcomes. In between, it includes 
targets, off-targets, networks and cell-level information, such as omics data, 
growth inhibition and morphology. Bioactivity data are expressed in a vector 
format, extending the concept of chemical similarity to similarity between 
bioactivity signatures. We show how CC signatures can aid drug discovery tasks, 
including target identification and library characterization. We also 
demonstrate the discovery of compounds that reverse and mimic biological 
signatures of disease models and genetic perturbations in cases that could not 
be addressed using chemical information alone. Overall, the CC signatures 
facilitate the conversion of bioactivity data to a format that is readily 
amenable to machine learning methods.

DOI: 10.1038/s41587-020-0502-7
PMCID: PMC7616951
PMID: 32440005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.