---
reference_id: PMID:34718726
title: "RNAInter v4.0: RNA interactome repository with redefined confidence scoring system and improved accessibility."
authors:
- Kang J
- Tang Q
- He J
- Li L
- Yang N
- Yu S
- Wang M
- Zhang Y
- Lin J
- Cui T
- Hu Y
- Tan P
- Cheng J
- Zheng H
- Wang D
- Su X
- Chen W
- Huang Y
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab997
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bacteria/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA/genetics, metabolism"
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Datasets as Topic
- Humans
- Internet
- "RNA/classification, genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/classification, genetics, metabolism"
- Research Design
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- User-Computer Interface
- "Viruses/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNAInter v4.0: RNA interactome repository with redefined confidence scoring system and improved accessibility.
**Authors:** Kang J, Tang Q, He J, Li L, Yang N, Yu S, Wang M, Zhang Y, Lin J, Cui T, Hu Y, Tan P, Cheng J, Zheng H, Wang D, Su X, Chen W, Huang Y
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab997](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab997)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D326-D332. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab997.

RNAInter v4.0: RNA interactome repository with redefined confidence scoring 
system and improved accessibility.

Kang J(1)(2), Tang Q(3)(4), He J(5), Li L(6), Yang N(5), Yu S(5), Wang M(5), 
Zhang Y(5), Lin J(2), Cui T(2), Hu Y(2), Tan P(2), Cheng J(1)(2), Zheng H(2), 
Wang D(2), Su X(1), Chen W(3)(4), Huang Y(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Affiliated Foshan Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital, Southern Medical 
University (Foshan Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital), Foshan 528000, China.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(3)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chengdu 611137, China.
(4)Innovative Institute of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy, Chengdu University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 611730, China.
(5)Department of Bioinformatics, Fujian Key Laboratory of Medical 
Bioinformatics, School of Medical Technology and Engineering, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou 350122, China.
(6)The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan 
People's Hospital, Qingyuan, 511518, China.
(7)Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(8)Shunde Hospital, Southern Medical University (The First People's Hospital of 
Shunde), Foshan 528308, China.

Establishing an RNA-associated interaction repository facilitates the 
system-level understanding of RNA functions. However, as these interactions are 
distributed throughout various resources, an essential prerequisite for 
effectively applying these data requires that they are deposited together and 
annotated with confidence scores. Hence, we have updated the RNA-associated 
interaction database RNAInter (RNA Interactome Database) to version 4.0, which 
is freely accessible at http://www.rnainter.org or 
http://www.rna-society.org/rnainter/. Compared with previous versions, the 
current RNAInter not only contains an enlarged data set, but also an updated 
confidence scoring system. The merits of this 4.0 version can be summarized in 
the following points: (i) a redefined confidence scoring system as achieved by 
integrating the trust of experimental evidence, the trust of the scientific 
community and the types of tissues/cells, (ii) a redesigned fully functional 
database that enables for a more rapid retrieval and browsing of interactions 
via an upgraded user-friendly interface and (iii) an update of entries to >47 
million by manually mining the literature and integrating six database resources 
with evidence from experimental and computational sources. Overall, RNAInter 
will provide a more comprehensive and readily accessible RNA interactome 
platform to investigate the regulatory landscape of cellular RNAs.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab997
PMCID: PMC8728132
PMID: 34718726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]