---
reference_id: PMID:34216021
title: An Evidence-Based Framework for Evaluating Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for Personalized Medicine.
authors:
- Whirl-Carrillo M
- Huddart R
- Gong L
- Sangkuhl K
- Thorn CF
- Whaley R
- Klein TE
journal: Clin Pharmacol Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/cpt.2350
keywords:
- "Databases, Genetic/standards"
- Drug Labeling/standards
- Drug Prescriptions/standards
- Humans
- Knowledge Bases
- Pharmacogenetics/standards
- Precision Medicine/standards
- Prescription Drugs/standards
- Reproducibility of Results
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Evidence-Based Framework for Evaluating Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for Personalized Medicine.
**Authors:** Whirl-Carrillo M, Huddart R, Gong L, Sangkuhl K, Thorn CF, Whaley R, Klein TE
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacol Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cpt.2350](https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2350)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Sep;110(3):563-572. doi: 10.1002/cpt.2350. Epub 2021
 Jul 22.

An Evidence-Based Framework for Evaluating Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for 
Personalized Medicine.

Whirl-Carrillo M(1), Huddart R(1), Gong L(1), Sangkuhl K(1), Thorn CF(1), Whaley 
R(1), Klein TE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Data Science, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Data Science and Biomedical Informatics Research, 
School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

Clinical annotations are one of the most popular resources available on the 
Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (PharmGKB). Each clinical annotation summarizes 
the association between variant-drug pairs, shows relevant findings from the 
curated literature, and is assigned a level of evidence (LOE) to indicate the 
strength of support for that association. Evidence from the pharmacogenomic 
literature is curated into PharmGKB as variant annotations, which can be used to 
create new clinical annotations or added to existing clinical annotations. This 
means that the same clinical annotation can be worked on by multiple curators 
over time. As more evidence is curated into PharmGKB, the task of maintaining 
consistency when assessing all the available evidence and assigning an LOE 
becomes increasingly difficult. To remedy this, a scoring system has been 
developed to automate LOE assignment to clinical annotations. Variant 
annotations are scored according to certain attributes, including study size, 
reported P value, and whether the variant annotation supports or fails to find 
an association. Clinical guidelines or US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved drug labels which give variant-specific prescribing guidance are 
also scored. The scores of all annotations attached to a clinical annotation are 
summed together to give a total score for the clinical annotation, which is used 
to calculate an LOE. Overall, the system increases transparency, consistency, 
and reproducibility in LOE assignment to clinical annotations. In combination 
with increased standardization of how clinical annotations are written, use of 
this scoring system helps to ensure that PharmGKB clinical annotations continue 
to be a robust source of pharmacogenomic information.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.2350
PMCID: PMC8457105
PMID: 34216021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest.