---
reference_id: PMID:29322913
title: Cell type discovery and representation in the era of high-content single cell phenotyping.
authors:
- Bakken T
- Cowell L
- Aevermann BD
- Novotny M
- Hodge R
- Miller JA
- Lee A
- Chang I
- McCorrison J
- Pulendran B
- Qian Y
- Schork NJ
- Lasken RS
- Lein ES
- Scheuermann RH
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1977-1
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Cells/classification, metabolism"
- Computational Biology/methods
- Humans
- "Sequence Analysis, RNA/methods"
- Single-Cell Analysis/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cell type discovery and representation in the era of high-content single cell phenotyping.
**Authors:** Bakken T, Cowell L, Aevermann BD, Novotny M, Hodge R, Miller JA, Lee A, Chang I, McCorrison J, Pulendran B, Qian Y, Schork NJ, Lasken RS, Lein ES, Scheuermann RH
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12859-017-1977-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-017-1977-1)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017 Dec 21;18(Suppl 17):559. doi: 
10.1186/s12859-017-1977-1.

Cell type discovery and representation in the era of high-content single cell 
phenotyping.

Bakken T(1), Cowell L(2), Aevermann BD(3), Novotny M(3), Hodge R(1), Miller 
JA(1), Lee A(3), Chang I(3), McCorrison J(3), Pulendran B(4), Qian Y(3), Schork 
NJ(3), Lasken RS(3), Lein ES(1), Scheuermann RH(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, Washington, 98103, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)J. Craig Venter Institute, 4120 Capricorn Lane, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, 201 Dowman 
Dr, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(5)J. Craig Venter Institute, 4120 Capricorn Lane, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. 
RScheuermann@jcvi.org.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. RScheuermann@jcvi.org.

BACKGROUND: A fundamental characteristic of multicellular organisms is the 
specialization of functional cell types through the process of differentiation. 
These specialized cell types not only characterize the normal functioning of 
different organs and tissues, they can also be used as cellular biomarkers of a 
variety of different disease states and therapeutic/vaccine responses. In order 
to serve as a reference for cell type representation, the Cell Ontology has been 
developed to provide a standard nomenclature of defined cell types for 
comparative analysis and biomarker discovery. Historically, these cell types 
have been defined based on unique cellular shapes and structures, anatomic 
locations, and marker protein expression. However, we are now experiencing a 
revolution in cellular characterization resulting from the application of new 
high-throughput, high-content cytometry and sequencing technologies. The 
resulting explosion in the number of distinct cell types being identified is 
challenging the current paradigm for cell type definition in the Cell Ontology.
RESULTS: In this paper, we provide examples of state-of-the-art cellular 
biomarker characterization using high-content cytometry and single cell RNA 
sequencing, and present strategies for standardized cell type representations 
based on the data outputs from these cutting-edge technologies, including 
"context annotations" in the form of standardized experiment metadata about the 
specimen source analyzed and marker genes that serve as the most useful features 
in machine learning-based cell type classification models. We also propose a 
statistical strategy for comparing new experiment data to these standardized 
cell type representations.
CONCLUSION: The advent of high-throughput/high-content single cell technologies 
is leading to an explosion in the number of distinct cell types being 
identified. It will be critical for the bioinformatics community to develop and 
adopt data standard conventions that will be compatible with these new 
technologies and support the data representation needs of the research 
community. The proposals enumerated here will serve as a useful starting point 
to address these challenges.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-017-1977-1
PMCID: PMC5763450
PMID: 29322913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.