---
reference_id: PMID:22180411
title: The Virtual Fly Brain browser and query interface.
authors:
- Milyaev N
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Reeve S
- Burton N
- Baldock RA
- Armstrong JD
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr677
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/anatomy & histology, metabolism"
- Brain Mapping
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Drosophila/anatomy & histology, physiology"
- Internet
- Neurosciences
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Virtual Fly Brain browser and query interface.
**Authors:** Milyaev N, Osumi-Sutherland D, Reeve S, Burton N, Baldock RA, Armstrong JD
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/btr677](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr677)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2012 Feb 1;28(3):411-5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr677.
Epub  2011 Dec 16.

The Virtual Fly Brain browser and query interface.

Milyaev N(1), Osumi-Sutherland D, Reeve S, Burton N, Baldock RA, Armstrong JD.

Author information:
(1)School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

MOTIVATION: Sources of neuroscience data in Drosophila are diverse and disparate 
making integrated search and retrieval difficult. A major obstacle to this is 
the lack of a comprehensive and logically structured anatomical framework and an 
intuitive interface.
RESULTS: We present an online resource that provides a convenient way to study 
and query fly brain anatomy, expression and genetic data. We extended the newly 
developed BrainName nomenclature for the adult fly brain into a logically 
structured ontology that relates a comprehensive set of published neuron classes 
to the brain regions they innervate. The Virtual Fly Brain interface allows 
users to explore the structure of the Drosophila brain by browsing 3D images of 
a brain with subregions displayed as coloured overlays. An integrated query 
mechanism allows complex searches of underlying anatomy, cells, expression and 
other data from community databases.
AVAILABILITY: Virtual Fly Brain is freely available online at 
www.virtualflybrain.org
CONTACT: jda@inf.ed.ac.uk.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr677
PMID: 22180411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]