---
reference_id: PMID:32510522
title: "CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset."
authors:
- Wang LL
- Lo K
- Chandrasekhar Y
- Reas R
- Yang J
- Burdick D
- Eide D
- Funk K
- Katsis Y
- Kinney R
- Li Y
- Liu Z
- Merrill W
- Mooney P
- Murdick D
- Rishi D
- Sheehan J
- Shen Z
- Stilson B
- Wade AD
- Wang K
- Wang NXR
- Wilhelm C
- Xie B
- Raymond D
- Weld DS
- Etzioni O
- Kohlmeier S
journal: ArXiv
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset.
**Authors:** Wang LL, Lo K, Chandrasekhar Y, Reas R, Yang J, Burdick D, Eide D, Funk K, Katsis Y, Kinney R, Li Y, Liu Z, Merrill W, Mooney P, Murdick D, Rishi D, Sheehan J, Shen Z, Stilson B, Wade AD, Wang K, Wang NXR, Wilhelm C, Xie B, Raymond D, Weld DS, Etzioni O, Kohlmeier S
**Journal:** ArXiv (2020)

## Content

1. ArXiv [Preprint]. 2020 Apr 22:arXiv:2004.10706v4.

CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset.

Wang LL(1), Lo K(1), Chandrasekhar Y(1), Reas R(1), Yang J(1), Burdick D(2), 
Eide D(3), Funk K(4), Katsis Y(2), Kinney R(1), Li Y(2), Liu Z(5), Merrill W(1), 
Mooney P(6), Murdick D(7), Rishi D(6), Sheehan J(4), Shen Z(3), Stilson B(1), 
Wade AD(5), Wang K(3), Wang NXR(2), Wilhelm C(1), Xie B(3), Raymond D(1), Weld 
DS(1)(8), Etzioni O(1), Kohlmeier S(1).

Author information:
(1)Allen Institute for AI.
(2)IBM Research.
(3)Microsoft Research.
(4)National Library of Medicine.
(5)Chan Zuckerberg Initiative.
(6)Kaggle.
(7)Georgetown University.
(8)University of Washington.

The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19) is a growing resource of scientific 
papers on Covid-19 and related historical coronavirus research. CORD-19 is 
designed to facilitate the development of text mining and information retrieval 
systems over its rich collection of metadata and structured full text papers. 
Since its release, CORD-19 has been downloaded over 200K times and has served as 
the basis of many Covid-19 text mining and discovery systems. In this article, 
we describe the mechanics of dataset construction, highlighting challenges and 
key design decisions, provide an overview of how CORD-19 has been used, and 
describe several shared tasks built around the dataset. We hope this resource 
will continue to bring together the computing community, biomedical experts, and 
policy makers in the search for effective treatments and management policies for 
Covid-19.

PMCID: PMC7251955
PMID: 32510522