---
reference_id: PMID:29448949
title: "A standardized framework for representation of ancestry data in genomics studies, with application to the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog."
authors:
- Morales J
- Welter D
- Bowler EH
- Cerezo M
- Harris LW
- McMahon AC
- Hall P
- Junkins HA
- Milano A
- Hastings E
- Malangone C
- Buniello A
- Burdett T
- Flicek P
- Parkinson H
- Cunningham F
- Hindorff LA
- MacArthur JAL
journal: Genome Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13059-018-1396-2
keywords:
- Genetic Variation
- Genome-Wide Association Study/standards
- Genomics/standards
- Humans
- Racial Groups
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A standardized framework for representation of ancestry data in genomics studies, with application to the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog.
**Authors:** Morales J, Welter D, Bowler EH, Cerezo M, Harris LW, McMahon AC, Hall P, Junkins HA, Milano A, Hastings E, Malangone C, Buniello A, Burdett T, Flicek P, Parkinson H, Cunningham F, Hindorff LA, MacArthur JAL
**Journal:** Genome Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13059-018-1396-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-018-1396-2)

## Content

1. Genome Biol. 2018 Feb 15;19(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s13059-018-1396-2.

A standardized framework for representation of ancestry data in genomics 
studies, with application to the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog.

Morales J(1), Welter D(2), Bowler EH(2), Cerezo M(2), Harris LW(2), McMahon 
AC(2), Hall P(3), Junkins HA(3), Milano A(2), Hastings E(2), Malangone C(2), 
Buniello A(2), Burdett T(2), Flicek P(2), Parkinson H(2), Cunningham F(2), 
Hindorff LA(3), MacArthur JAL(4).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. jmorales@ebi.ac.uk.
(2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK.
(3)Division of Genomic Medicine, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892-9305, USA.
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. jalm@ebi.ac.uk.

The accurate description of ancestry is essential to interpret, access, and 
integrate human genomics data, and to ensure that these benefit individuals from 
all ancestral backgrounds. However, there are no established guidelines for the 
representation of ancestry information. Here we describe a framework for the 
accurate and standardized description of sample ancestry, and validate it by 
application to the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog. We confirm known biases and gaps in 
diversity, and find that African and Hispanic or Latin American ancestry 
populations contribute a disproportionately high number of associations. It is 
our hope that widespread adoption of this framework will lead to improved 
analysis, interpretation, and integration of human genomics data.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-018-1396-2
PMCID: PMC5815218
PMID: 29448949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: PF is 
a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of Omicia, Inc. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.