---
reference_id: PMID:22874154
title: An information artifact ontology perspective on data collections and associated representational artifacts.
authors:
- Ceusters W
journal: Stud Health Technol Inform
year: '2012'
keywords:
- Artifacts
- "Databases, Factual/standards"
- Electronic Health Records/standards
- Information Storage and Retrieval/standards
- Medical Record Linkage/standards
- "Quality Assurance, Health Care/standards"
- United States
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An information artifact ontology perspective on data collections and associated representational artifacts.
**Authors:** Ceusters W
**Journal:** Stud Health Technol Inform (2012)

## Content

1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2012;180:68-72.

An information artifact ontology perspective on data collections and associated 
representational artifacts.

Ceusters W(1).

Author information:
(1)New York State Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics & Life Sciences, 
Buffalo, NY, USA. ceusters@buffalo.edu

Biomedical data collections are typically compiled on the basis of assessment 
instruments and associated terminologies and their data structure explained by 
means of data dictionaries. The Information Artifact Ontology (IAO) is an 
attempt to give a realism-based account of the essence of information entities 
and how components of such entities relate to each other and to that what they 
are information about. Changes in the taxonomy and the definitions of the IAO, 
most importantly the addition of the terms 'representational artifact' and 
'representational unit', are proposed to make the IAO a useful tool to clarify 
formally the distinctions and commonalities between data collections and 
associated artifacts that are compiled independently from each other, yet cover 
the same domain.

PMID: 22874154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]