---
reference_id: PMID:21209921
title: A gross anatomy ontology for hymenoptera.
authors:
- Yoder MJ
- Mikó I
- Seltmann KC
- Bertone MA
- Deans AR
journal: PLoS One
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015991
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Anatomy/methods
- Animals
- Classification
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Factual"
- Decision Trees
- "Hymenoptera/anatomy & histology, physiology"
- Internet
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Phenotype
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A gross anatomy ontology for hymenoptera.
**Authors:** Yoder MJ, Mikó I, Seltmann KC, Bertone MA, Deans AR
**Journal:** PLoS One (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0015991](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0015991)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e15991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015991.

A gross anatomy ontology for hymenoptera.

Yoder MJ(1), Mikó I, Seltmann KC, Bertone MA, Deans AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North 
Carolina, United States of America.

Hymenoptera is an extraordinarily diverse lineage, both in terms of species 
numbers and morphotypes, that includes sawflies, bees, wasps, and ants. These 
organisms serve critical roles as herbivores, predators, parasitoids, and 
pollinators, with several species functioning as models for agricultural, 
behavioral, and genomic research. The collective anatomical knowledge of these 
insects, however, has been described or referred to by labels derived from 
numerous, partially overlapping lexicons. The resulting corpus of 
information--millions of statements about hymenopteran phenotypes--remains 
inaccessible due to language discrepancies. The Hymenoptera Anatomy Ontology 
(HAO) was developed to surmount this challenge and to aid future communication 
related to hymenopteran anatomy. The HAO was built using newly developed 
interfaces within mx, a Web-based, open source software package, that enables 
collaborators to simultaneously contribute to an ontology. Over twenty people 
contributed to the development of this ontology by adding terms, genus 
differentia, references, images, relationships, and annotations. The database 
interface returns an Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) formatted version of the 
ontology and includes mechanisms for extracting candidate data and for 
publishing a searchable ontology to the Web. The application tools are 
subject-agnostic and may be used by others initiating and developing ontologies. 
The present core HAO data constitute 2,111 concepts, 6,977 terms (labels for 
concepts), 3,152 relations, 4,361 sensus (links between terms, concepts, and 
references) and over 6,000 text and graphical annotations. The HAO is rooted 
with the Common Anatomy Reference Ontology (CARO), in order to facilitate 
interoperability with and future alignment to other anatomy ontologies, and is 
available through the OBO Foundry ontology repository and BioPortal. The HAO 
provides a foundation through which connections between genomic, evolutionary 
developmental biology, phylogenetic, taxonomic, and morphological research can 
be actualized. Inherent mechanisms for feedback and content delivery demonstrate 
the effectiveness of remote, collaborative ontology development and facilitate 
future refinement of the HAO.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015991
PMCID: PMC3012123
PMID: 21209921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.