---
reference_id: PMID:23042674
title: "LNCipedia: a database for annotated human lncRNA transcript sequences and structures."
authors:
- Volders PJ
- Helsens K
- Wang X
- Menten B
- Martens L
- Gevaert K
- Vandesompele J
- Mestdagh P
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gks915
keywords:
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Humans
- Internet
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Proteins/genetics
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Software
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LNCipedia: a database for annotated human lncRNA transcript sequences and structures.
**Authors:** Volders PJ, Helsens K, Wang X, Menten B, Martens L, Gevaert K, Vandesompele J, Mestdagh P
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gks915](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks915)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan;41(Database issue):D246-51. doi:
10.1093/nar/gks915.  Epub 2012 Oct 5.

LNCipedia: a database for annotated human lncRNA transcript sequences and 
structures.

Volders PJ(1), Helsens K, Wang X, Menten B, Martens L, Gevaert K, Vandesompele 
J, Mestdagh P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Here, we present LNCipedia (http://www.lncipedia.org), a novel database for 
human long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcripts and genes. LncRNAs constitute a 
large and diverse class of non-coding RNA genes. Although several lncRNAs have 
been functionally annotated, the majority remains to be characterized. Different 
high-throughput methods to identify new lncRNAs (including RNA sequencing and 
annotation of chromatin-state maps) have been applied in various studies 
resulting in multiple unrelated lncRNA data sets. LNCipedia offers 21 488 
annotated human lncRNA transcripts obtained from different sources. In addition 
to basic transcript information and gene structure, several statistics are 
determined for each entry in the database, such as secondary structure 
information, protein coding potential and microRNA binding sites. Our analyses 
suggest that, much like microRNAs, many lncRNAs have a significant secondary 
structure, in-line with their presumed association with proteins or protein 
complexes. Available literature on specific lncRNAs is linked, and users or 
authors can submit articles through a web interface. Protein coding potential is 
assessed by two different prediction algorithms: Coding Potential Calculator and 
HMMER. In addition, a novel strategy has been integrated for detecting 
potentially coding lncRNAs by automatically re-analysing the large body of 
publicly available mass spectrometry data in the PRIDE database. LNCipedia is 
publicly available and allows users to query and download lncRNA sequences and 
structures based on different search criteria. The database may serve as a 
resource to initiate small- and large-scale lncRNA studies. As an example, the 
LNCipedia content was used to develop a custom microarray for expression 
profiling of all available lncRNAs.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks915
PMCID: PMC3531107
PMID: 23042674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]