---
reference_id: PMID:31769834
title: "The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: enabling universal sickle cell-based knowledge representation."
authors:
- Sickle Cell Disease Ontology Working Group
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/database/baz118
keywords:
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/pathology"
- Biological Ontologies
- Humans
- Knowledge Bases
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: enabling universal sickle cell-based knowledge representation.
**Authors:** Sickle Cell Disease Ontology Working Group
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/baz118](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/baz118)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2019 Jan 1;2019:baz118. doi: 10.1093/database/baz118.

The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: enabling universal sickle cell-based knowledge 
representation.

Sickle Cell Disease Ontology Working Group.

Collaborators: Adekile A(1), Anie KA(2), Ben Hamda C(3), Brown B(4), Bukini 
D(5), Campbell A(6), Chaouch M(3), Chimusa E(7), Chunda-Liyoka C(8), 
Dennis-Antwi J(9), Derebail VK(10), Flor-Park M(11), Geard A(12)(13), Ghedira 
K(3), Haendel M(14), Hanchard NA(15), Hotchkiss J(7), Jonas M(7), Ibrahim M(16), 
Ingram C(7), Inusa B(17), Ozohu Jimoh A(18), Jupp S(19), Kamga K(7)(20), 
Abimbola Kashim Z(18), Knight-Madden J(21), Landouré G(22)(23), Lopez-Sall 
P(24), Makani J(5), Malasa L(5), Masekoameng T(7), Mazandu G(7), Mnika K(7), 
Mulder N(25), Munung NS(26), Munube D(27), Mwita L(5), Nembaware V(7), Nnodu 
O(28), Ofori-Acquah S(29)(30), Ohene-Frempong K(31), Osei-Akoto A(32), Paintsil 
V(33), Panji S(25), Rahimy MC(34), Royal C(35), Sangeda RZ(36), Tayo B(37), 
Tiouiri I(3), Tluway F(5), Treadwell M(38), Tshilolo L(39), Vasilevsky N(40), 
Waiswa KM(41), Wonkam A(7).

Author information:
(1)Kuwait University, Kuwait City, Kuwait.
(2)Haematology and Sickle Cell Centre, London North West University Healthcare 
NHS Trust & Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Biomathematics and Biostatistics (LR16IPT09), 
Institute Pasteur of Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(4)Department of Paediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, 
Nigeria.
(5)Sickle Cell Programme, Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, 
Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Tanzania.
(6)Division of Hematology, Children’s National Medical Center, George Washington 
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)University Teaching Hospitals - Children’s Hospital, University of Zambia, 
Lusaka, Zambia.
(9)Sickle Cell Foundation of Ghana. East Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(10)UNC Kidney Center, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
(11)Onco Hematology Unit, Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Clínicas, 
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.
(12)Gene Transfer Technology Group, UCL EGA Institute for Women’s Health, 
University College London, London, UK.
(13)University of the Witwatersrand, School of Pathology, Antiviral Gene Therapy 
Research Unit, Health Sciences Faculty, South Africa.
(14)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(15)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(16)Institute of Endemic Diseases, - University of Khartoum, Sudan.
(17)Department of Paediatric Haematology, Evelina Children’s Hospital, Guy’s and 
St Thomas NHS Trust, London.
(18)Department of Genetics, Genomics and Bioinformatics - National Biotechnology 
Development Agency (NABDA), Abuja, Nigeria.
(19)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(20)FMBS, University of Yaounde.
(21)The Sickle Cell Unit, Caribbean Institute for Health Research, the 
University of the West Indies.
(22)Faculté de Médecine et d’Odontostomatologie, USTTB, Mali.
(23)Service de Neurologie, CHU du Point “G”, Bamako, Mali.
(24)Department of Pharmacy, Biochemistry Unit, Cheikh Anta Diop University, 
Dakar, Senegal.
(25)Computational Biology Division, IDM, CIDRI-Africa Wellcome Trust Centre, 
University of Cape Town Faculty of Health Sciences Anzio Road, Observatory, Cape 
Town, South Africa.
(26)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, South Africa.
(27)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Makerere University/Mulago 
National Referral Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(28)Department of Haematology & Blood Transfusion, College of Health Sciences, 
University of Abuja, Abuja, Nigeria.
(29)Dean, School of Biomedical and Allied Health Sciences.
(30)Director, SickleGenAfrica:Sickle Cell Disease Genomics Network of Africa.
(31)President, Sickle Cell Foundation of Ghana.
(32)Dept. of Child Health, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Kwame Nkrumah 
University of Science and Technology/Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, 
Ghana.
(33)Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, Ghana.
(34)Centre de Prise en Charge Medicale Integree du Nourrisson et de la Femme 
Enceinte atteints de Drepanocytose, (The National Sickle Cell Disease 
Institute), Cotonou, Republic of Benin.
(35)Departments of African & African American Studies, Biology, and Community & 
Family Medicine, Duke University, Durham, USA.
(36)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Muhimbili University of Health 
and Allied Sciences, Tanzania.
(37)Department of Public Health Sciences, Loyola University Chicago Stritch 
School of Medicine, Maywood, IL, USA.
(38)UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital Oakland, Department of Hematology/Oncology 
747 52nd Street Oakland, CA USA 94609.
(39)Centre de Formation et d’Appui sanitaire/MONKOLE, Kinshasa, DR Congo.
(40)Oregon Clinical & Translational Research Institute, Department of Medical 
Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, USA.
(41)Department of Medicine, Makerere University College of Health sciences, 
University college of Health sciences.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is one of the most common monogenic diseases in humans 
with multiple phenotypic expressions that can manifest as both acute and chronic 
complications. Although described more than a century ago, challenges in 
comprehensive disease management and collaborative research on this disease are 
compounded by the complex molecular and clinical phenotypes of SCD, 
environmental and psychosocial factors, limited therapeutic options and 
ambiguous terminology. This ambiguous terminology has hampered the integration 
and interoperability of existing SCD knowledge, and SCD research translation. 
The SCD Ontology (SCDO), which is a community-driven integrative and universal 
knowledge representation system for SCD, overcomes this issue by providing a 
controlled vocabulary developed by a group of experts in both SCD and ontology 
design. SCDO is the first and most comprehensive standardized human- and 
machine-readable resource that unambiguously represents terminology and concepts 
about SCD for researchers, patients and clinicians. It is built around the 
central concept 'hemoglobinopathy', allowing inclusion of non-SCD 
haemoglobinopathies, such as thalassaemias, which may interfere with or 
influence SCD phenotypic manifestations. This collaboratively developed ontology 
constitutes a comprehensive knowledge management system and standardized 
terminology of various SCD-related factors. The SCDO will promote 
interoperability of different research datasets, facilitate seamless data 
sharing and collaborations, including meta-analyses within the SCD community, 
and support the development and curation of data-basing and clinical informatics 
in SCD.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baz118
PMCID: PMC6878945
PMID: 31769834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]