---
reference_id: PMID:30357364
title: "Protein Data Bank: the single global archive for 3D macromolecular structure data."
authors:
- wwPDB consortium
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky949
keywords:
- DNA/chemistry
- "Databases, Protein"
- Metals/chemistry
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Conformation
- Nucleic Acid Conformation
- Protein Conformation
- RNA/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein Data Bank: the single global archive for 3D macromolecular structure data.
**Authors:** wwPDB consortium
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky949](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky949)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D520-D528. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky949.

Protein Data Bank: the single global archive for 3D macromolecular structure 
data.

wwPDB consortium.

Collaborators: Burley SK, Berman HM, Bhikadiya C, Bi C, Chen L, Costanzo LD, 
Christie C, Duarte JM, Dutta S, Feng Z, Ghosh S, Goodsell DS, Green RK, 
Guranovic V, Guzenko D, Hudson BP, Liang Y, Lowe R, Peisach E, Periskova I, 
Randle C, Rose A, Sekharan M, Shao C, Tao YP, Valasatava Y, Voigt M, Westbrook 
J, Young J, Zardecki C, Zhuravleva M, Kurisu G, Nakamura H, Kengaku Y, Cho H, 
Sato J, Kim JY, Ikegawa Y, Nakagawa A, Yamashita R, Kudou T, Bekker GJ, Suzuki 
H, Iwata T, Yokochi M, Kobayashi N, Fujiwara T, Velankar S, Kleywegt GJ, Anyango 
S, Armstrong DR, Berrisford JM, Conroy MJ, Dana JM, Deshpande M, Gane P, 
Gáborová R, Gupta D, Gutmanas A, Koča J, Mak L, Mir S, Mukhopadhyay A, Nadzirin 
N, Nair S, Patwardhan A, Paysan-Lafosse T, Pravda L, Salih O, Sehnal D, Varadi 
M, Vařeková R, Markley JL, Hoch JC, Romero PR, Baskaran K, Maziuk D, Ulrich EL, 
Wedell JR, Yao H, Livny M, Ioannidis YE.

The Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the single global archive of experimentally 
determined three-dimensional (3D) structure data of biological macromolecules. 
Since 2003, the PDB has been managed by the Worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB; 
wwpdb.org), an international consortium that collaboratively oversees 
deposition, validation, biocuration, and open access dissemination of 3D 
macromolecular structure data. The PDB Core Archive houses 3D atomic coordinates 
of more than 144 000 structural models of proteins, DNA/RNA, and their complexes 
with metals and small molecules and related experimental data and metadata. 
Structure and experimental data/metadata are also stored in the PDB Core Archive 
using the readily extensible wwPDB PDBx/mmCIF master data format, which will 
continue to evolve as data/metadata from new experimental techniques and 
structure determination methods are incorporated by the wwPDB. Impacts of the 
recently developed universal wwPDB OneDep deposition/validation/biocuration 
system and various methods-specific wwPDB Validation Task Forces on improving 
the quality of structures and data housed in the PDB Core Archive are described 
together with current challenges and future plans.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky949
PMCID: PMC6324056
PMID: 30357364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]