---
reference_id: PMID:21478484
title: The Rat Genome Database pathway portal.
authors:
- Petri V
- Shimoyama M
- Hayman GT
- Smith JR
- Tutaj M
- de Pons J
- Dwinell MR
- Munzenmaier DH
- Twigger SN
- Jacob HJ
- RGD Team
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/database/bar010
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Regulatory Networks/genetics
- Genome/genetics
- Humans
- Internet
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics
- Rats
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Rat Genome Database pathway portal.
**Authors:** Petri V, Shimoyama M, Hayman GT, Smith JR, Tutaj M, de Pons J, Dwinell MR, Munzenmaier DH, Twigger SN, Jacob HJ, RGD Team
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bar010](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bar010)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2011 Apr 8;2011:bar010. doi: 10.1093/database/bar010. Print
 2011.

The Rat Genome Database pathway portal.

Petri V(1), Shimoyama M, Hayman GT, Smith JR, Tutaj M, de Pons J, Dwinell MR, 
Munzenmaier DH, Twigger SN, Jacob HJ; RGD Team.

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, WI, 
53226-3548, USA. vpetri@mcw.edu

The set of interacting molecules collectively referred to as a pathway or 
network represents a fundamental structural unit, the building block of the 
larger, highly integrated networks of biological systems. The scientific 
community's interest in understanding the fine details of how pathways work, 
communicate with each other and synergize, and how alterations in one or several 
pathways may converge into a disease phenotype, places heightened demands on 
pathway data and information providers. To meet such demands, the Rat Genome 
Database [(RGD) http://rgd.mcw.edu] has adopted a multitiered approach to 
pathway data acquisition and presentation. Resources and tools are continuously 
added or expanded to offer more comprehensive pathway data sets as well as 
enhanced pathway data manipulation, exploration and visualization capabilities. 
At RGD, users can easily identify genes in pathways, see how pathways relate to 
each other and visualize pathways in a dynamic and integrated manner. They can 
access these and other components from several entry points and effortlessly 
navigate between them and they can download the data of interest. The Pathway 
Portal resources at RGD are presented, and future directions are discussed. 
Database URL: http://rgd.mcw.edu.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bar010
PMCID: PMC3072770
PMID: 21478484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]