---
reference_id: PMID:36936385
title: NIH SenNet Consortium to map senescent cells throughout the human lifespan to understand physiological health.
authors:
- SenNet Consortium
journal: Nat Aging
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s43587-022-00326-5
keywords:
- United States
- Humans
- Longevity
- Cellular Senescence/genetics
- Biomarkers
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NIH SenNet Consortium to map senescent cells throughout the human lifespan to understand physiological health.
**Authors:** SenNet Consortium
**Journal:** Nat Aging (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43587-022-00326-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00326-5)

## Content

1. Nat Aging. 2022 Dec;2(12):1090-1100. doi: 10.1038/s43587-022-00326-5. Epub
2022  Dec 20.

NIH SenNet Consortium to map senescent cells throughout the human lifespan to 
understand physiological health.

SenNet Consortium.

Cells respond to many stressors by senescing, acquiring stable growth arrest, 
morphologic and metabolic changes, and a proinflammatory senescence-associated 
secretory phenotype. The heterogeneity of senescent cells (SnCs) and 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype are vast, yet ill characterized. SnCs 
have diverse roles in health and disease and are therapeutically targetable, 
making characterization of SnCs and their detection a priority. The Cellular 
Senescence Network (SenNet), a National Institutes of Health Common Fund 
initiative, was established to address this need. The goal of SenNet is to map 
SnCs across the human lifespan to advance diagnostic and therapeutic approaches 
to improve human health. State-of-the-art methods will be applied to identify, 
define and map SnCs in 18 human tissues. A common coordinate framework will 
integrate data to create four-dimensional SnC atlases. Other key SenNet 
deliverables include innovative tools and technologies to detect SnCs, new SnC 
biomarkers and extensive public multi-omics datasets. This Perspective lays out 
the impetus, goals, approaches and products of SenNet.

DOI: 10.1038/s43587-022-00326-5
PMCID: PMC10019484
PMID: 36936385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests J.H.L. is an inventor on a 
pending patent applications related to Seq-Scope. L.G. is an inventor on two 
pending patent applications related to Pixel-seq. H.D.-L. has a research 
contract with MegaPro Biomedical and serves as managing director of a publishing 
company, Monasteria Press. R.F. is co-founder and scientific advisor of 
IsoPlexis, Singleron Biotechnologies and AtlasXomics. N.G. is a co-founder and 
equity owner of Datavisyn. J.C. receives research support from Ono, who are 
working on a new senolytic and have stock in Unity Biotechnology. The other 
authors declare no competing interests.