---
reference_id: PMID:24358873
title: Construction and accessibility of a cross-species phenotype ontology along with gene annotations for biomedical research.
authors:
- Köhler S
- Doelken SC
- Ruef BJ
- Bauer S
- Washington N
- Westerfield M
- Gkoutos G
- Schofield P
- Smedley D
- Lewis SE
- Robinson PN
- Mungall CJ
journal: F1000Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.2-30.v2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Construction and accessibility of a cross-species phenotype ontology along with gene annotations for biomedical research.
**Authors:** Köhler S, Doelken SC, Ruef BJ, Bauer S, Washington N, Westerfield M, Gkoutos G, Schofield P, Smedley D, Lewis SE, Robinson PN, Mungall CJ
**Journal:** F1000Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.12688/f1000research.2-30.v2](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.2-30.v2)

## Content

1. F1000Res. 2013 Feb 1;2:30. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.2-30.v2. eCollection 
2013.

Construction and accessibility of a cross-species phenotype ontology along with 
gene annotations for biomedical research.

Köhler S(1), Doelken SC(2), Ruef BJ(3), Bauer S(2), Washington N(4), Westerfield 
M(3), Gkoutos G(5), Schofield P(6), Smedley D(7), Lewis SE(4), Robinson PN(8), 
Mungall CJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, 13353, Germany ; Berlin-Brandenberg Center for Regenerative Therapies 
(BCRT), Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 13353, Germany.
(2)Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, 13353, Germany.
(3)ZFIN, Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene OR, 97403-5291, 
USA.
(4)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA, 94720, USA.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University of Aberystwyth, Aberystwyth, SY23 
2AX, UK.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 3EH, UK.
(7)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, 
CB10 1SA, UK.
(8)Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, 13353, Germany ; Berlin-Brandenberg Center for Regenerative Therapies 
(BCRT), Charité-Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 13353, Germany ; Max Planck 
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 14195, Germany.

Phenotype analyses, e.g. investigating metabolic processes, tissue formation, or 
organism behavior, are an important element of most biological and medical 
research activities. Biomedical researchers are making increased use of 
ontological standards and methods to capture the results of such analyses, with 
one focus being the comparison and analysis of phenotype information between 
species. We have generated a cross-species phenotype ontology for human, mouse 
and zebrafish that contains classes from the Human Phenotype Ontology, Mammalian 
Phenotype Ontology, and generated classes for zebrafish phenotypes. We also 
provide up-to-date annotation data connecting human genes to phenotype classes 
from the generated ontology. We have included the data generation pipeline into 
our continuous integration system ensuring stable and up-to-date releases. This 
article describes the data generation process and is intended to help interested 
researchers access both the phenotype annotation data and the associated 
cross-species phenotype ontology. The resource described here can be used in 
sophisticated semantic similarity and gene set enrichment analyses for phenotype 
data across species. The stable releases of this resource can be obtained from 
http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/hp/uberpheno/.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.2-30.v2
PMCID: PMC3799545
PMID: 24358873

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No competing interests were 
declared.