---
reference_id: PMID:33290552
title: "The Gene Ontology resource: enriching a GOld mine."
authors:
- Gene Ontology Consortium
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1113
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arabidopsis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Caenorhabditis elegans/genetics, metabolism"
- "Dictyostelium/genetics, metabolism"
- "Drosophila melanogaster/genetics, metabolism"
- "Escherichia coli/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Ontology
- Humans
- Internet
- Mice
- "Molecular Sequence Annotation/statistics & numerical data"
- Rats
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics, metabolism"
- "Schizosaccharomyces/genetics, metabolism"
- User-Computer Interface
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Gene Ontology resource: enriching a GOld mine.
**Authors:** Gene Ontology Consortium
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa1113](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1113)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D325-D334. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1113.

The Gene Ontology resource: enriching a GOld mine.

Gene Ontology Consortium.

Collaborators: Carbon S, Douglass E, Good BM, Unni DR, Harris NL, Mungall CJ, 
Basu S, Chisholm RL, Dodson RJ, Hartline E, Fey P, Thomas PD, Albou LP, Ebert D, 
Kesling MJ, Mi H, Muruganujan A, Huang X, Mushayahama T, LaBonte SA, Siegele DA, 
Antonazzo G, Attrill H, Brown NH, Garapati P, Marygold SJ, Trovisco V, Dos 
Santos G, Falls K, Tabone C, Zhou P, Goodman JL, Strelets VB, Thurmond J, 
Garmiri P, Ishtiaq R, Rodríguez-López M, Acencio ML, Kuiper M, Lægreid A, Logie 
C, Lovering RC, Kramarz B, Saverimuttu SCC, Pinheiro SM, Gunn H, Su R, Thurlow 
KE, Chibucos M, Giglio M, Nadendla S, Munro J, Jackson R, Duesbury MJ, Del-Toro 
N, Meldal BHM, Paneerselvam K, Perfetto L, Porras P, Orchard S, Shrivastava A, 
Chang HY, Finn RD, Mitchell AL, Rawlings ND, Richardson L, Sangrador-Vegas A, 
Blake JA, Christie KR, Dolan ME, Drabkin HJ, Hill DP, Ni L, Sitnikov DM, Harris 
MA, Oliver SG, Rutherford K, Wood V, Hayles J, Bähler J, Bolton ER, De Pons JL, 
Dwinell MR, Hayman GT, Kaldunski ML, Kwitek AE, Laulederkind SJF, Plasterer C, 
Tutaj MA, Vedi M, Wang SJ, D'Eustachio P, Matthews L, Balhoff JP, Aleksander SA, 
Alexander MJ, Cherry JM, Engel SR, Gondwe F, Karra K, Miyasato SR, Nash RS, 
Simison M, Skrzypek MS, Weng S, Wong ED, Feuermann M, Gaudet P, Morgat A, Bakker 
E, Berardini TZ, Reiser L, Subramaniam S, Huala E, Arighi CN, Auchincloss A, 
Axelsen K, Argoud-Puy G, Bateman A, Blatter MC, Boutet E, Bowler E, Breuza L, 
Bridge A, Britto R, Bye-A-Jee H, Casas CC, Coudert E, Denny P, Estreicher A, 
Famiglietti ML, Georghiou G, Gos A, Gruaz-Gumowski N, Hatton-Ellis E, Hulo C, 
Ignatchenko A, Jungo F, Laiho K, Le Mercier P, Lieberherr D, Lock A, Lussi Y, 
MacDougall A, Magrane M, Martin MJ, Masson P, Natale DA, Hyka-Nouspikel N, 
Orchard S, Pedruzzi I, Pourcel L, Poux S, Pundir S, Rivoire C, Speretta E, 
Sundaram S, Tyagi N, Warner K, Zaru R, Wu CH, Diehl AD, Chan JN, Grove C, Lee 
RYN, Muller HM, Raciti D, Van Auken K, Sternberg PW, Berriman M, Paulini M, Howe 
K, Gao S, Wright A, Stein L, Howe DG, Toro S, Westerfield M, Jaiswal P, Cooper 
L, Elser J.

The Gene Ontology Consortium (GOC) provides the most comprehensive resource 
currently available for computable knowledge regarding the functions of genes 
and gene products. Here, we report the advances of the consortium over the past 
two years. The new GO-CAM annotation framework was notably improved, and we 
formalized the model with a computational schema to check and validate the 
rapidly increasing repository of 2838 GO-CAMs. In addition, we describe the 
impacts of several collaborations to refine GO and report a 10% increase in the 
number of GO annotations, a 25% increase in annotated gene products, and over 
9,400 new scientific articles annotated. As the project matures, we continue our 
efforts to review older annotations in light of newer findings, and, to maintain 
consistency with other ontologies. As a result, 20 000 annotations derived from 
experimental data were reviewed, corresponding to 2.5% of experimental GO 
annotations. The website (http://geneontology.org) was redesigned for quick 
access to documentation, downloads and tools. To maintain an accurate resource 
and support traceability and reproducibility, we have made available a 
historical archive covering the past 15 years of GO data with a consistent 
format and file structure for both the ontology and annotations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1113
PMCID: PMC7779012
PMID: 33290552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]