---
reference_id: PMID:34318308
title: "Planarian Anatomy Ontology: a resource to connect data within and across experimental platforms."
authors:
- Nowotarski SH
- Davies EL
- Robb SMC
- Ross EJ
- Matentzoglu N
- Doddihal V
- Mir M
- McClain M
- Sánchez Alvarado A
journal: Development
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1242/dev.196097
keywords:
- Animals
- Embryonic Development/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Gene Ontology
- Life Cycle Stages/genetics
- "Planarians/anatomy & histology, genetics"
- Regeneration/genetics
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Planarian Anatomy Ontology: a resource to connect data within and across experimental platforms.
**Authors:** Nowotarski SH, Davies EL, Robb SMC, Ross EJ, Matentzoglu N, Doddihal V, Mir M, McClain M, Sánchez Alvarado A
**Journal:** Development (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.196097](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.196097)

## Content

1. Development. 2021 Aug 1;148(15):dev196097. doi: 10.1242/dev.196097. Epub 2021 
Aug 2.

Planarian Anatomy Ontology: a resource to connect data within and across 
experimental platforms.

Nowotarski SH(1)(2), Davies EL(1)(3), Robb SMC(1), Ross EJ(1)(2), Matentzoglu 
N(4), Doddihal V(1), Mir M(1), McClain M(1), Sánchez Alvarado A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA.
(3)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(4)European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.

As the planarian research community expands, the need for an interoperable data 
organization framework for tool building has become increasingly apparent. Such 
software would streamline data annotation and enhance cross-platform and 
cross-species searchability. We created the Planarian Anatomy Ontology (PLANA), 
an extendable relational framework of defined Schmidtea mediterranea (Smed) 
anatomical terms used in the field. At publication, PLANA contains over 850 
terms describing Smed anatomy from subcellular to system levels across all life 
cycle stages, in intact animals and regenerating body fragments. Terms from 
other anatomy ontologies were imported into PLANA to promote interoperability 
and comparative anatomy studies. To demonstrate the utility of PLANA as a tool 
for data curation, we created resources for planarian embryogenesis, including a 
staging series and molecular fate-mapping atlas, and the Planarian Anatomy Gene 
Expression database, which allows retrieval of a variety of published 
transcript/gene expression data associated with PLANA terms. As an open-source 
tool built using FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, reproducible) 
principles, our strategy for continued curation and versioning of PLANA also 
provides a platform for community-led growth and evolution of this resource.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.196097
PMCID: PMC8353266
PMID: 34318308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.