---
reference_id: PMID:35363306
title: "The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: recent development and expansion of the universal sickle cell knowledge representation."
authors:
- Mazandu GK
- Hotchkiss J
- Nembaware V
- Wonkam A
- Mulder N
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/database/baac014
keywords:
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/genetics"
- "Databases, Factual"
- Humans
- Knowledge Bases
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: recent development and expansion of the universal sickle cell knowledge representation.
**Authors:** Mazandu GK, Hotchkiss J, Nembaware V, Wonkam A, Mulder N
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/baac014](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/baac014)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2022 Apr 1;2022:baac014. doi: 10.1093/database/baac014.

The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: recent development and expansion of the 
universal sickle cell knowledge representation.

Mazandu GK(1), Hotchkiss J(1), Nembaware V(1), Wonkam A(1), Mulder N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Human Genetics, University of Cape Town, 
Health Sciences Campus, Anzio Rd, Observatory 7925, South Africa.
(2)Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, Computational Biology 
Division, IDM, CIDRI-Africa WT Centre, University of Cape Town, Health Sciences 
Campus. Anzio Rd, Observatory 7925, South Africa.

The Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) Ontology (SCDO, 
https://scdontology.h3abionet.org/) provides a comprehensive knowledge base of 
SCD management, systems and standardized human and machine-readable resources 
that unambiguously describe terminology and concepts about SCD for researchers, 
patients and clinicians. The SCDO was launched in 2016 and is continuously 
updated in quantity, as well as in quality, to effectively support the curation 
of SCD research, patient databasing and clinical informatics applications. SCD 
knowledge from the scientific literature is used to update existing SCDO terms 
and create new terms where necessary. Here, we report major updates to the SCDO, 
from December 2019 until April 2021, for promoting interoperability and 
facilitating SCD data harmonization, sharing and integration across different 
studies and for retrospective multi-site research collaborations. SCDO 
developers continue to collaborate with the SCD community, clinicians and 
researchers to improve specific ontology areas and expand standardized 
descriptions to conditions influencing SCD phenotypic expressions and clinical 
manifestations of the sickling process, e.g. thalassemias. Database URL: 
https://scdontology.h3abionet.org/.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baac014
PMCID: PMC9216550
PMID: 35363306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]