---
reference_id: PMID:21624163
title: Mining of vaccine-associated IFN-γ gene interaction networks using the Vaccine Ontology.
authors:
- Ozgür A
- Xiang Z
- Radev DR
- He Y
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mining of vaccine-associated IFN-γ gene interaction networks using the Vaccine Ontology.
**Authors:** Ozgür A, Xiang Z, Radev DR, He Y
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S8](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S8)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2011 May 17;2 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S8. doi: 
10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S8.

Mining of vaccine-associated IFN-γ gene interaction networks using the Vaccine 
Ontology.

Ozgür A(1), Xiang Z, Radev DR, He Y.

Author information:
(1)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA. yongqunh@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) is vital in vaccine-induced immune defense 
against bacterial and viral infections and tumor. Our recent study demonstrated 
the power of a literature-based discovery method in extraction and comparison of 
the IFN-γ and vaccine-mediated gene interaction networks. The Vaccine Ontology 
(VO) contains a hierarchy of vaccine names. It is hypothesized that the 
application of VO will enhance the prediction of IFN-γ and vaccine-mediated gene 
interaction network.
RESULTS: In this study, 186 specific vaccine names listed in the Vaccine 
Ontology (VO) and their semantic relations were used for possible improved 
retrieval of the IFN-γ and vaccine associated gene interactions. The application 
of VO allows discovery of 38 more genes and 60 more interactions. Comparison of 
different layers of IFN-γ networks and the example BCG vaccine-induced 
subnetwork led to generation of new hypotheses. By analyzing all discovered 
genes using centrality metrics, 32 genes were ranked high in the VO-based IFN-γ 
vaccine network using four centrality scores. Furthermore, 28 specific vaccines 
were found to be associated with these top 32 genes. These specific vaccine-gene 
associations were further used to generate a network of vaccine-vaccine 
associations. The BCG and LVS vaccines are found to be the most central vaccines 
in the vaccine-vaccine association network.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that the combined usages of biomedical 
ontologies and centrality-based literature mining are able to significantly 
facilitate discovery of gene interaction networks and gene-concept associations.
AVAILABILITY: VO is available at: http://www.violinet.org/vaccineontology; and 
the SVM edit kernel for gene interaction extraction is available at: 
http://www.violinet.org/ifngvonet/int_ext_svm.zip.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-2-S2-S8
PMCID: PMC3102897
PMID: 21624163