---
reference_id: PMID:34831777
title: "The Prescription of Drug Ontology 2.0 (PDRO): More Than the Sum of Its Parts."
authors:
- Ethier JF
- Goyer F
- Fabry P
- Barton A
journal: Int J Environ Res Public Health
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijerph182212025
keywords:
- Electronic Health Records
- Humans
- Pharmacies
- Prescription Drugs
- Prescriptions
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Prescription of Drug Ontology 2.0 (PDRO): More Than the Sum of Its Parts.
**Authors:** Ethier JF, Goyer F, Fabry P, Barton A
**Journal:** Int J Environ Res Public Health (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijerph182212025](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182212025)

## Content

1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Nov 16;18(22):12025. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph182212025.

The Prescription of Drug Ontology 2.0 (PDRO): More Than the Sum of Its Parts.

Ethier JF(1), Goyer F(1), Fabry P(1), Barton A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Groupe de Recherche Interdisciplinaire en Informatique de la Santé 
(GRIIS.ca), Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
(2)IRIT-Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse (CNRS), 31400 
Toulouse, France.

While drugs and related products have profoundly changed the lives of people 
around the world, ongoing challenges remain, including inappropriate use of a 
drug product. Inappropriate uses can be explained in part by ambiguous or 
incomplete information, for example, missing reasons for treatments, ambiguous 
information on how to take a medication, or lack of information on 
medication-related events outside the health care system. In order to fully 
assess the situation, data from multiple systems (electronic medical records, 
pharmacy and radiology information systems, laboratory management systems, etc.) 
from multiple organizations (outpatient clinics, hospitals, long-term care 
facilities, laboratories, pharmacies, registries, governments) on a large 
geographical scale is needed. Formal knowledge models like ontologies can help 
address such an information integration challenge. Existing approaches like the 
Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership are discussed and contrasted with the 
use of ontologies and systems using them for data integration. The PRescription 
Drug Ontology 2.0 (PDRO 2.0) is then presented and entities that are paramount 
in addressing this problematic are described. Finally, the benefits of using 
PDRO are discussed through a series of exemplar situation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph182212025
PMCID: PMC8619589
PMID: 34831777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.