---
reference_id: PMID:30407590
title: "ECO, the Evidence & Conclusion Ontology: community standard for evidence information."
authors:
- Giglio M
- Tauber R
- Nadendla S
- Munro J
- Olley D
- Ball S
- Mitraka E
- Schriml LM
- Gaudet P
- Hobbs ET
- Erill I
- Siegele DA
- Hu JC
- Mungall C
- Chibucos MC
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1036
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Ontology
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval/methods
- Internet
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, Protein"
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ECO, the Evidence & Conclusion Ontology: community standard for evidence information.
**Authors:** Giglio M, Tauber R, Nadendla S, Munro J, Olley D, Ball S, Mitraka E, Schriml LM, Gaudet P, Hobbs ET, Erill I, Siegele DA, Hu JC, Mungall C, Chibucos MC
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky1036](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1036)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D1186-D1194. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1036.

ECO, the Evidence & Conclusion Ontology: community standard for evidence 
information.

Giglio M(1), Tauber R(1), Nadendla S(1), Munro J(1), Olley D(1), Ball S(1), 
Mitraka E(1), Schriml LM(1), Gaudet P(2), Hobbs ET(3), Erill I(3), Siegele 
DA(4), Hu JC(5), Mungall C(6), Chibucos MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77840, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77840, USA.
(6)Molecular Ecosystems Biology, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The Evidence and Conclusion Ontology (ECO) contains terms (classes) that 
describe types of evidence and assertion methods. ECO terms are used in the 
process of biocuration to capture the evidence that supports biological 
assertions (e.g. gene product X has function Y as supported by evidence Z). 
Capture of this information allows tracking of annotation provenance, 
establishment of quality control measures and query of evidence. ECO contains 
over 1500 terms and is in use by many leading biological resources including the 
Gene Ontology, UniProt and several model organism databases. ECO is continually 
being expanded and revised based on the needs of the biocuration community. The 
ontology is freely available for download from GitHub 
(https://github.com/evidenceontology/) or the project's website 
(http://evidenceontology.org/). Users can request new terms or changes to 
existing terms through the project's GitHub site. ECO is released into the 
public domain under CC0 1.0 Universal.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1036
PMCID: PMC6323956
PMID: 30407590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]