---
reference_id: PMID:29258588
title: Integrating phenotype ontologies with PhenomeNET.
authors:
- Rodríguez-García MÁ
- Gkoutos GV
- Schofield PN
- Hoehndorf R
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-017-0167-4
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Disease/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrating phenotype ontologies with PhenomeNET.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-García MÁ, Gkoutos GV, Schofield PN, Hoehndorf R
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-017-0167-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-017-0167-4)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2017 Dec 19;8(1):58. doi: 10.1186/s13326-017-0167-4.

Integrating phenotype ontologies with PhenomeNET.

Rodríguez-García MÁ(1)(2), Gkoutos GV(3)(4)(5), Schofield PN(6), Hoehndorf 
R(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), King Abdullah University of 
Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division 
(CEMSE), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, PO Box 
2882, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia.
(3)College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Institute of Cancer and Genomic 
Sciences, Centre for Computational Biology, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(4)Institute of Translational Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham, NHS 
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(5)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth 
University, Aberystwyth, SY23 2AX, UK.
(6)Department of Physiology, Development & Neuroscience, University of 
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EG, UK.
(7)Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), King Abdullah University of 
Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. 
robert.hoehndorf@kaust.edu.sa.
(8)Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division 
(CEMSE), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, PO Box 
2882, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. robert.hoehndorf@kaust.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: Integration and analysis of phenotype data from humans and model 
organisms is a key challenge in building our understanding of normal biology and 
pathophysiology. However, the range of phenotypes and anatomical details being 
captured in clinical and model organism databases presents complex problems when 
attempting to match classes across species and across phenotypes as diverse as 
behaviour and neoplasia. We have previously developed PhenomeNET, a system for 
disease gene prioritization that includes as one of its components an ontology 
designed to integrate phenotype ontologies. While not applicable to matching 
arbitrary ontologies, PhenomeNET can be used to identify related phenotypes in 
different species, including human, mouse, zebrafish, nematode worm, fruit fly, 
and yeast.
RESULTS: Here, we apply the PhenomeNET to identify related classes from two 
phenotype and two disease ontologies using automated reasoning. We demonstrate 
that we can identify a large number of mappings, some of which require automated 
reasoning and cannot easily be identified through lexical approaches alone. 
Combining automated reasoning with lexical matching further improves results in 
aligning ontologies.
CONCLUSIONS: PhenomeNET can be used to align and integrate phenotype ontologies. 
The results can be utilized for biomedical analyses in which phenomena observed 
in model organisms are used to identify causative genes and mutations underlying 
human disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-017-0167-4
PMCID: PMC5735523
PMID: 29258588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.