---
reference_id: PMID:16697710
title: "NCI Thesaurus: a semantic model integrating cancer-related clinical and molecular information."
authors:
- Sioutos N
- de Coronado S
- Haber MW
- Hartel FW
- Shaiu WL
- Wright LW
journal: J Biomed Inform
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2006.02.013
keywords:
- Biomedical Research/methods
- Computational Biology/methods
- Database Management Systems
- "Databases, Factual"
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval/methods
- National Institutes of Health (U.S.)
- Neoplasm Proteins/metabolism
- "Neoplasms/classification, physiopathology"
- Semantics
- Systems Integration
- United States
- User-Computer Interface
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NCI Thesaurus: a semantic model integrating cancer-related clinical and molecular information.
**Authors:** Sioutos N, de Coronado S, Haber MW, Hartel FW, Shaiu WL, Wright LW
**Journal:** J Biomed Inform (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbi.2006.02.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2006.02.013)

## Content

1. J Biomed Inform. 2007 Feb;40(1):30-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2006.02.013. Epub
2006  Mar 15.

NCI Thesaurus: a semantic model integrating cancer-related clinical and 
molecular information.

Sioutos N(1), de Coronado S, Haber MW, Hartel FW, Shaiu WL, Wright LW.

Author information:
(1)Aspen Systems Corporation, USA.

Over the last 8 years, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) has launched a major 
effort to integrate molecular and clinical cancer-related information within a 
unified biomedical informatics framework, with controlled terminology as its 
foundational layer. The NCI Thesaurus is the reference terminology underpinning 
these efforts. It is designed to meet the growing need for accurate, 
comprehensive, and shared terminology, covering topics including: cancers, 
findings, drugs, therapies, anatomy, genes, pathways, cellular and subcellular 
processes, proteins, and experimental organisms. The NCI Thesaurus provides a 
partial model of how these things relate to each other, responding to actual 
user needs and implemented in a deductive logic framework that can help maintain 
the integrity and extend the informational power of what is provided. This paper 
presents the semantic model for cancer diseases and its uses in integrating 
clinical and molecular knowledge, more briefly examines the models and uses for 
drug, biochemical pathway, and mouse terminology, and discusses limits of the 
current approach and directions for future work.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2006.02.013
PMID: 16697710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]