---
reference_id: PMID:25484339
title: "DISEASES: text mining and data integration of disease-gene associations."
authors:
- Pletscher-Frankild S
- Pallejà A
- Tsafou K
- Binder JX
- Jensen LJ
journal: Methods
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.020
keywords:
- Data Mining/methods
- "Databases, Genetic/statistics & numerical data"
- Disease/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DISEASES: text mining and data integration of disease-gene associations.
**Authors:** Pletscher-Frankild S, Pallejà A, Tsafou K, Binder JX, Jensen LJ
**Journal:** Methods (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.020)

## Content

1. Methods. 2015 Mar;74:83-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.020. Epub 2014 Dec 5.

DISEASES: text mining and data integration of disease-gene associations.

Pletscher-Frankild S(1), Pallejà A(2), Tsafou K(1), Binder JX(3), Jensen LJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Disease Systems Biology, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Disease Systems Biology, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic 
Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany; Bioinformatics Core Facility, Luxembourg 
Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(4)Department of Disease Systems Biology, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: lars.juhl.jensen@cpr.ku.dk.

Text mining is a flexible technology that can be applied to numerous different 
tasks in biology and medicine. We present a system for extracting disease-gene 
associations from biomedical abstracts. The system consists of a highly 
efficient dictionary-based tagger for named entity recognition of human genes 
and diseases, which we combine with a scoring scheme that takes into account 
co-occurrences both within and between sentences. We show that this approach is 
able to extract half of all manually curated associations with a false positive 
rate of only 0.16%. Nonetheless, text mining should not stand alone, but be 
combined with other types of evidence. For this reason, we have developed the 
DISEASES resource, which integrates the results from text mining with manually 
curated disease-gene associations, cancer mutation data, and genome-wide 
association studies from existing databases. The DISEASES resource is accessible 
through a web interface at http://diseases.jensenlab.org/, where the text-mining 
software and all associations are also freely available for download.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.020
PMID: 25484339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]