---
reference_id: PMID:30371878
title: "COSMIC: the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer."
authors:
- Tate JG
- Bamford S
- Jubb HC
- Sondka Z
- Beare DM
- Bindal N
- Boutselakis H
- Cole CG
- Creatore C
- Dawson E
- Fish P
- Harsha B
- Hathaway C
- Jupe SC
- Kok CY
- Noble K
- Ponting L
- Ramshaw CC
- Rye CE
- Speedy HE
- Stefancsik R
- Thompson SL
- Wang S
- Ward S
- Campbell PJ
- Forbes SA
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1015
keywords:
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Genes
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neoplasms/genetics
- Protein Conformation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COSMIC: the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer.
**Authors:** Tate JG, Bamford S, Jubb HC, Sondka Z, Beare DM, Bindal N, Boutselakis H, Cole CG, Creatore C, Dawson E, Fish P, Harsha B, Hathaway C, Jupe SC, Kok CY, Noble K, Ponting L, Ramshaw CC, Rye CE, Speedy HE, Stefancsik R, Thompson SL, Wang S, Ward S, Campbell PJ, Forbes SA
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky1015](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1015)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D941-D947. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1015.

COSMIC: the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer.

Tate JG(1), Bamford S(1), Jubb HC(1)(2), Sondka Z(1), Beare DM(1), Bindal N(1), 
Boutselakis H(1), Cole CG(1), Creatore C(1), Dawson E(1), Fish P(1), Harsha 
B(1), Hathaway C(1), Jupe SC(1), Kok CY(1), Noble K(1), Ponting L(1), Ramshaw 
CC(1), Rye CE(1), Speedy HE(1)(3), Stefancsik R(1), Thompson SL(1), Wang S(1), 
Ward S(1), Campbell PJ(1), Forbes SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 
1SA, UK.
(2)Astex Pharmaceuticals, 436 Cambridge Science Park, Cambridge CB4 0QA, UK.
(3)Open Targets, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.

COSMIC, the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer 
(https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk) is the most detailed and comprehensive resource 
for exploring the effect of somatic mutations in human cancer. The latest 
release, COSMIC v86 (August 2018), includes almost 6 million coding mutations 
across 1.4 million tumour samples, curated from over 26 000 publications. In 
addition to coding mutations, COSMIC covers all the genetic mechanisms by which 
somatic mutations promote cancer, including non-coding mutations, gene fusions, 
copy-number variants and drug-resistance mutations. COSMIC is primarily 
hand-curated, ensuring quality, accuracy and descriptive data capture. Building 
on our manual curation processes, we are introducing new initiatives that allow 
us to prioritize key genes and diseases, and to react more quickly and 
comprehensively to new findings in the literature. Alongside improvements to the 
public website and data-download systems, new functionality in COSMIC-3D allows 
exploration of mutations within three-dimensional protein structures, their 
protein structural and functional impacts, and implications for druggability. In 
parallel with COSMIC's deep and broad variant coverage, the Cancer Gene Census 
(CGC) describes a curated catalogue of genes driving every form of human cancer. 
Currently describing 719 genes, the CGC has recently introduced functional 
descriptions of how each gene drives disease, summarized into the 10 cancer 
Hallmarks.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1015
PMCID: PMC6323903
PMID: 30371878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]