---
reference_id: PMID:9651497
title: An internet-accessible database of mouse developmental anatomy based on a systematic nomenclature.
authors:
- Bard JL
- Kaufman MH
- Dubreuil C
- Brune RM
- Burger A
- Baldock RA
- Davidson DR
journal: Mech Dev
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4773(98)00069-0
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Lineage
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/anatomy & histology"
- Embryonic and Fetal Development
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Internet
- Male
- Mice/embryology
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An internet-accessible database of mouse developmental anatomy based on a systematic nomenclature.
**Authors:** Bard JL, Kaufman MH, Dubreuil C, Brune RM, Burger A, Baldock RA, Davidson DR
**Journal:** Mech Dev (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4773(98)00069-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4773(98)00069-0)

## Content

1. Mech Dev. 1998 Jun;74(1-2):111-20. doi: 10.1016/s0925-4773(98)00069-0.

An internet-accessible database of mouse developmental anatomy based on a 
systematic nomenclature.

Bard JL(1), Kaufman MH, Dubreuil C, Brune RM, Burger A, Baldock RA, Davidson DR.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Developmental Biology and Department of Anatomy, Medical School, 
Edinburgh University, UK.

This paper reports an internet-accessible database of mouse developmental 
anatomy (DMDA) that currently holds a hierarchy of the names and synonyms of the 
tissues in the first 22 Theiler stages of development (E1-E13.5), together with 
other appropriate information. The purposes of the database are to provide, 
first, a nomenclature for analyzing normal and mutant mouse anatomy, and second 
a language for inputting, storing and querying gene-expression and other 
spatially organized data. DMDA currently contains some 6900 named and staged 
tissues (e.g. 360 and 1161 tissues in Theiler stage (TS) 14 (E9) and TS22 
(E13.5) embryos). DMDA will be extended to include further lineage and other 
data when it becomes available. The database can be interactively accessed over 
the internet using either a Java or a non-Java WWW browser at 
http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4773(98)00069-0
PMID: 9651497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]