---
reference_id: PMID:23256535
title: Ontology representation and analysis of vaccine formulation and administration and their effects on vaccine immune responses.
authors:
- Lin Y
- He Y
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-17
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ontology representation and analysis of vaccine formulation and administration and their effects on vaccine immune responses.
**Authors:** Lin Y, He Y
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-3-17](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-3-17)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2012 Dec 20;3(1):17. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-17.

Ontology representation and analysis of vaccine formulation and administration 
and their effects on vaccine immune responses.

Lin Y(1), He Y.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Laboratory Animal Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. yongqunh@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: A vaccine is a processed material that if administered, is able to 
stimulate an adaptive immune response to prevent or ameliorate a disease. A 
vaccination process may protect the host against subsequent exposure to an 
infectious agent and result in reduced disease or total prevention of the 
disease. Vaccine formulation and administration methods may affect vaccine 
safety and efficacy significantly.
RESULTS: In this report, the detailed classification and definitions of vaccine 
components and vaccine administration processes are represented using OWL within 
the framework of the Vaccine Ontology (VO). Different use cases demonstrate how 
different vaccine formulations and routes of vaccine administration affect the 
protection efficacy, general immune responses, and adverse events following 
vaccination. For example, vaccinations of mice with Brucella abortus vaccine 
strain RB51 using intraperitoneal or intranasal administration resulted in 
different protection levels. As shown in the vaccine adverse event data provided 
by US FDA, live attenuated and nonliving vaccines are usually administered in 
different routes and have different local and systematic adverse effect 
manifestations.
CONCLUSIONS: Vaccine formulation and administration route can independently or 
collaboratively affect host response outcomes (positive protective immunity or 
adverse events) after vaccination. Ontological representation of different 
vaccine and vaccination factors in these two areas allows better understanding 
and analysis of the causal effects between different factors and immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-17
PMCID: PMC3639077
PMID: 23256535