---
reference_id: PMID:21975162
title: iRefScape. A Cytoscape plug-in for visualization and data mining of protein interaction data from iRefIndex.
authors:
- Razick S
- Mora A
- Michalickova K
- Boddie P
- Donaldson IM
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-388
keywords:
- Data Mining
- Database Management Systems
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Databases, Protein"
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- Proteins/metabolism
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# iRefScape. A Cytoscape plug-in for visualization and data mining of protein interaction data from iRefIndex.
**Authors:** Razick S, Mora A, Michalickova K, Boddie P, Donaldson IM
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2105-12-388](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-388)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Oct 5;12:388. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-388.

iRefScape. A Cytoscape plug-in for visualization and data mining of protein 
interaction data from iRefIndex.

Razick S(1), Mora A, Michalickova K, Boddie P, Donaldson IM.

Author information:
(1)The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, P,O, Box 1125 Blindern, 
0317 Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The iRefIndex consolidates protein interaction data from ten 
databases in a rigorous manner using sequence-based hash keys. Working with 
consolidated interaction data comes with distinct challenges: data are 
redundant, overlapping, highly interconnected and may be collected and 
represented using different curation practices. These phenomena were quantified 
in our previous studies.
RESULTS: The iRefScape plug-in for the Cytoscape graphical viewer addresses 
these challenges. We show how these factors impact on data-mining tasks and how 
our solutions resolve them in a simple and efficient manner. A uniform accession 
space is used to limit redundancy and support search expansion and searching on 
multiple accession types. Multiple node and edge features support data filtering 
and mining. Node colours and features supply information about search result 
provenance. Overlapping evidence is presented using a multi-graph and a 
bi-partite representation is used to distinguish binary and n-ary source data. 
Searching for interactions between sets of proteins is supported and 
specifically includes searches on disease-related genes found in OMIM. Finally, 
a synchronized adjacency-matrix view facilitates visualization of relationships 
between sets of user defined groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The iRefScape plug-in will be of interest to advanced users of 
interaction data. The plug-in provides access to a consolidated data set in a 
uniform accession space while remaining faithful to the underlying source data. 
Tools are provided to facilitate a range of tasks from a simple search to 
knowledge discovery. The plug-in uses a number of strategies that will be of 
interest to other plug-in developers.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-388
PMCID: PMC3228863
PMID: 21975162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]