---
reference_id: PMID:39304538
title: "The mutant mouse resource and research center (MMRRC) consortium: the US-based public mouse repository system."
authors:
- Agca Y
- Amos-Landgraf J
- Araiza R
- Brennan J
- Carlson C
- Ciavatta D
- Clary D
- Franklin C
- Korf I
- Lutz C
- Magnuson T
- de Villena FP
- Mirochnitchenko O
- Patel S
- Port D
- Reinholdt L
- Lloyd KCK
journal: Mamm Genome
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00335-024-10070-3
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- United States
- Cryopreservation/methods
- Humans
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Biomedical Research
- National Institutes of Health (U.S.)
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mutant mouse resource and research center (MMRRC) consortium: the US-based public mouse repository system.
**Authors:** Agca Y, Amos-Landgraf J, Araiza R, Brennan J, Carlson C, Ciavatta D, Clary D, Franklin C, Korf I, Lutz C, Magnuson T, de Villena FP, Mirochnitchenko O, Patel S, Port D, Reinholdt L, Lloyd KCK
**Journal:** Mamm Genome (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00335-024-10070-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00335-024-10070-3)

## Content

1. Mamm Genome. 2024 Dec;35(4):524-536. doi: 10.1007/s00335-024-10070-3. Epub
2024  Sep 20.

The mutant mouse resource and research center (MMRRC) consortium: the US-based 
public mouse repository system.

Agca Y(1), Amos-Landgraf J(1), Araiza R(2)(3), Brennan J(4), Carlson C(2)(3), 
Ciavatta D(4), Clary D(2)(3), Franklin C(1), Korf I(2), Lutz C(5), Magnuson 
T(4), de Villena FP(4), Mirochnitchenko O(6), Patel S(2), Port D(2)(3), 
Reinholdt L(5), Lloyd KCK(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences 
and Bioinformatics Core, Genome Center, University of California, Davis, CA, 
USA.
(3)Mouse Biology Program, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.
(6)Division of Comparative Medicine, Office of Research Infrastructure Programs, 
Division of Program Coordination, Planning, and Strategic Initiatives, Office of 
the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA.
(7)Mouse Biology Program, University of California, Davis, CA, USA. 
kclloyd@ucdavis.edu.
(8)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, 
CA, USA. kclloyd@ucdavis.edu.

Now in its 25th year, the Mutant Mouse Resource and Research Center (MMRRC) 
consortium continues to serve the United States and international biomedical 
scientific community as a public repository and distribution archive of 
laboratory mouse models of human disease for research. Supported by the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), the MMRRC consists of 4 regionally distributed and 
dedicated vivaria, offices, and specialized laboratory facilities and an 
Informatics Coordination and Service Center (ICSC). The overarching purpose of 
the MMRRC is to facilitate groundbreaking biomedical research by offering an 
extensive repertoire of mutant mice that are essential for advancing the 
understanding of human physiology and disease. The function of the MMRRC is to 
identify, acquire, evaluate, characterize, cryopreserve, and distribute mutant 
mouse strains to qualified biomedical investigators around the nation and the 
globe. Mouse strains accepted from the research community are held to the 
highest scientific standards to optimize reproducibility and enhance scientific 
rigor and transparency. All submitted strains are thoroughly reviewed, 
documented, and validated using extensive scientific quality control measures. 
In addition, the MMRRC conducts resource-related research on cryopreservation, 
mouse genetics, environmental conditions, and other topics that enhance 
operations of the MMRRC. Today, the MMRRC maintains an archive of mice, 
cryopreserved embryos and sperm, embryonic stem (ES) cell lines, and murine 
hybridomas for nearly 65,000 alleles. Since its inception, the MMRRC has 
fulfilled more than 20,000 orders from 13,651 scientists at 8441 institutions 
worldwide. The MMRRC also provides numerous services to assist researchers, 
including scientific consultation, technical assistance, genetic assays, 
microbiome analysis, analytical phenotyping, pathology, cryorecovery, husbandry, 
breeding and colony management, infectious disease surveillance, and disease 
modeling. The ICSC coordinates MMRRC operations, interacts with researchers, and 
manages the website (mmrrc.org) and online catalogue. Researchers benefit from 
an expansive list of well-defined mouse models of disease that meet the highest 
scientific standards while submitting investigators benefit by having their 
mouse strains cryopreserved, protected, and distributed in compliance with NIH 
policies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-024-10070-3
PMCID: PMC11522152
PMID: 39304538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author states that there is no conflict of interest.