---
reference_id: PMID:34820659
title: The Data Use Ontology to streamline responsible access to human biomedical datasets.
authors:
- Lawson J
- Cabili MN
- Kerry G
- Boughtwood T
- Thorogood A
- Alper P
- Bowers SR
- Boyles RR
- Brookes AJ
- Brush M
- Burdett T
- Clissold H
- Donnelly S
- Dyke SOM
- Freeberg MA
- Haendel MA
- Hata C
- Holub P
- Jeanson F
- Jene A
- Kawashima M
- Kawashima S
- Konopko M
- Kyomugisha I
- Li H
- Linden M
- Rodriguez LL
- Morita M
- Mulder N
- Muller J
- Nagaie S
- Nasir J
- Ogishima S
- Ota Wang V
- Paglione LD
- Pandya RN
- Parkinson H
- Philippakis AA
- Prasser F
- Rambla J
- Reinold K
- Rushton GA
- Saltzman A
- Saunders G
- Sofia HJ
- Spalding JD
- Swertz MA
- Tulchinsky I
- van Enckevort EJ
- Varma S
- Voisin C
- Yamamoto N
- Yamasaki C
- Zass L
- Guidry Auvil JM
- Nyrönen TH
- Courtot M
journal: Cell Genom
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2021.100028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Data Use Ontology to streamline responsible access to human biomedical datasets.
**Authors:** Lawson J, Cabili MN, Kerry G, Boughtwood T, Thorogood A, Alper P, Bowers SR, Boyles RR, Brookes AJ, Brush M, Burdett T, Clissold H, Donnelly S, Dyke SOM, Freeberg MA, Haendel MA, Hata C, Holub P, Jeanson F, Jene A, Kawashima M, Kawashima S, Konopko M, Kyomugisha I, Li H, Linden M, Rodriguez LL, Morita M, Mulder N, Muller J, Nagaie S, Nasir J, Ogishima S, Ota Wang V, Paglione LD, Pandya RN, Parkinson H, Philippakis AA, Prasser F, Rambla J, Reinold K, Rushton GA, Saltzman A, Saunders G, Sofia HJ, Spalding JD, Swertz MA, Tulchinsky I, van Enckevort EJ, Varma S, Voisin C, Yamamoto N, Yamasaki C, Zass L, Guidry Auvil JM, Nyrönen TH, Courtot M
**Journal:** Cell Genom (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xgen.2021.100028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xgen.2021.100028)

## Content

1. Cell Genom. 2021 Nov 10;1(2):None. doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2021.100028.

The Data Use Ontology to streamline responsible access to human biomedical 
datasets.

Lawson J(1), Cabili MN(1), Kerry G(2), Boughtwood T(3), Thorogood A(4)(5), Alper 
P(5), Bowers SR(6), Boyles RR(7), Brookes AJ(8), Brush M(9), Burdett T(2), 
Clissold H(6), Donnelly S(1), Dyke SOM(10), Freeberg MA(2), Haendel MA(9), Hata 
C(11), Holub P(12), Jeanson F(13), Jene A(14), Kawashima M(15), Kawashima S(16), 
Konopko M(17), Kyomugisha I(18), Li H(19), Linden M(20), Rodriguez LL(21), 
Morita M(22), Mulder N(23), Muller J(24)(25), Nagaie S(26), Nasir J(27), 
Ogishima S(26), Ota Wang V(28), Paglione LD(29), Pandya RN(30), Parkinson H(2), 
Philippakis AA(1), Prasser F(31), Rambla J(14), Reinold K(1), Rushton GA(1), 
Saltzman A(1), Saunders G(17), Sofia HJ(32), Spalding JD(2), Swertz MA(33), 
Tulchinsky I(34), van Enckevort EJ(33), Varma S(35), Voisin C(34), Yamamoto 
N(36), Yamasaki C(36), Zass L(23), Guidry Auvil JM(28), Nyrönen TH(20), Courtot 
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK.
(3)Australian Genomics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(4)Centre of Genomics and Policy, Department of Human Genetics, McGill 
University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)ELIXIR-Luxembourg, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of 
Luxembourg, Belvaux, Luxembourg.
(6)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(7)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(8)University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(9)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(10)McGill Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(11)Bioinformation and DDBJ Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Japan.
(12)BBMRI-ERIC, AT and Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(13)University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(14)Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Barcelona, Spain.
(15)National Bioscience Database Center, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Database Center for Life Science, Joint Support-Center for Data Science 
Research, Research Organization of Information and Systems, Kashiwa, Japan.
(17)ELIXIR Hub, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(18)Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(19)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(20)ELIXIR-Finland, CSC - IT Center for Science Ltd, Espoo, Finland.
(21)Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
(22)Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.
(23)Computational Biology Division, IDM, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(24)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Institut de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace, 
INSERM U1112, Université; de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(25)Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Institut de Génétique Médicale 
d'Alsace, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(26)Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization (ToMMo), Tohoku University, Sendai, 
Japan.
(27)Department of Life Sciences, University of Northampton, Northampton, UK.
(28)Office of Data Sharing, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, MD, USA.
(29)Spherical Cow Group, Rego Park, NY 11374, USA.
(30)Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052, USA.
(31)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(32)National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(33)Genomics Coordination Center, Department of Genetics, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(34)Google Cloud, Kitchener, ON N2H 5G5, Canada.
(35)Health Data Research UK, Gibbs Building, 215 Euston Road, London NW1 2BE, 
UK.
(36)Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Human biomedical datasets that are critical for research and clinical studies to 
benefit human health also often contain sensitive or potentially identifying 
information of individual participants. Thus, care must be taken when they are 
processed and made available to comply with ethical and regulatory frameworks 
and informed consent data conditions. To enable and streamline data access for 
these biomedical datasets, the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) 
Data Use and Researcher Identities (DURI) work stream developed and approved the 
Data Use Ontology (DUO) standard. DUO is a hierarchical vocabulary of human and 
machine-readable data use terms that consistently and unambiguously represents a 
dataset's allowable data uses. DUO has been implemented by major international 
stakeholders such as the Broad and Sanger Institutes and is currently used in 
annotation of over 200,000 datasets worldwide. Using DUO in data management and 
access facilitates researchers' discovery and access of relevant datasets. DUO 
annotations increase the FAIRness of datasets and support data linkages using 
common data use profiles when integrating the data for secondary analyses. DUO 
is implemented in the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and, to increase community 
awareness and engagement, hosted in an open, centralized GitHub repository. DUO, 
together with the GA4GH Passport standard, offers a new, efficient, and 
streamlined data authorization and access framework that has enabled increased 
sharing of biomedical datasets worldwide.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xgen.2021.100028
PMCID: PMC8591903
PMID: 34820659

Conflict of interest statement: M.N.C. is an employee of Foundation Medicine and 
equity holder of Roche. A.A.P. is a venture partner at GV and an employee of 
alphabet corporation. He has received funding from MSFT, Verily, IBM, Intel, 
Bayer, and Novartis. The views expressed by L.L.R. are the author’s own and do 
not necessarily represent those of her organization.