---
reference_id: PMID:25825651
title: Expanding the mammalian phenotype ontology to support automated exchange of high throughput mouse phenotyping data generated by large-scale mouse knockout screens.
authors:
- Smith CL
- Eppig JT
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-015-0009-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the mammalian phenotype ontology to support automated exchange of high throughput mouse phenotyping data generated by large-scale mouse knockout screens.
**Authors:** Smith CL, Eppig JT
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-015-0009-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-015-0009-1)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2015 Mar 25;6:11. doi: 10.1186/s13326-015-0009-1. 
eCollection 2015.

Expanding the mammalian phenotype ontology to support automated exchange of high 
throughput mouse phenotyping data generated by large-scale mouse knockout 
screens.

Smith CL(1), Eppig JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Mouse Genome Informatics, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609 USA.

BACKGROUND: A vast array of data is about to emerge from the large scale 
high-throughput mouse knockout phenotyping projects worldwide. It is critical 
that this information is captured in a standardized manner, made accessible, and 
is fully integrated with other phenotype data sets for comprehensive querying 
and analysis across all phenotype data types. The volume of data generated by 
the high-throughput phenotyping screens is expected to grow exponentially, thus, 
automated methods and standards to exchange phenotype data are required.
RESULTS: The IMPC (International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium) is using the 
Mammalian Phenotype (MP) ontology in the automated annotation of phenodeviant 
data from high throughput phenotyping screens. 287 new term additions with 
additional hierarchy revisions were made in multiple branches of the MP ontology 
to accurately describe the results generated by these high throughput screens.
CONCLUSIONS: Because these large scale phenotyping data sets will be reported 
using the MP as the common data standard for annotation and data exchange, 
automated importation of these data to MGI (Mouse Genome Informatics) and other 
resources is possible without curatorial effort. Maximum biomedical value of 
these mutant mice will come from integrating primary high-throughput phenotyping 
data with secondary, comprehensive phenotypic analyses combined with published 
phenotype details on these and related mutants at MGI and other resources.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-015-0009-1
PMCID: PMC4378007
PMID: 25825651