---
reference_id: PMID:32819435
title: "Structuring, reuse and analysis of electronic dental data using the Oral Health and Disease Ontology."
authors:
- Duncan WD
- Thyvalikakath T
- Haendel M
- Torniai C
- Hernandez P
- Song M
- Acharya A
- Caplan DJ
- Schleyer T
- Ruttenberg A
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-020-00222-0
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Disease
- Electronic Health Records
- Oral Health
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structuring, reuse and analysis of electronic dental data using the Oral Health and Disease Ontology.
**Authors:** Duncan WD, Thyvalikakath T, Haendel M, Torniai C, Hernandez P, Song M, Acharya A, Caplan DJ, Schleyer T, Ruttenberg A
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-020-00222-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-020-00222-0)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2020 Aug 20;11(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s13326-020-00222-0.

Structuring, reuse and analysis of electronic dental data using the Oral Health 
and Disease Ontology.

Duncan WD(1)(2), Thyvalikakath T(3)(4), Haendel M(5), Torniai C(6), Hernandez 
P(7), Song M(8), Acharya A(9), Caplan DJ(10), Schleyer T(3)(11), Ruttenberg 
A(12).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Ontological Research, Buffalo, NY, USA. 
wdduncan@gmail.com.
(2)Center for Biomedical Informatics, Regenstrief institute, Inc., Indianapolis, 
IN, USA. wdduncan@gmail.com.
(3)Center for Biomedical Informatics, Regenstrief institute, Inc., Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(4)Dental Informatics Core, Indiana University School of Dentistry, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Translational and Integrative Sciences Lab, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, OR, USA.
(6)Domino Data Lab, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Reparto Universitario, San Juan, PR, USA.
(8)Magee-Women's Research Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(9)Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, Marshfield, WI, USA.
(10)University of Iowa College of Dentistry, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(11)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(12)School of Dental Medicine, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: A key challenge for improving the quality of health care is to be 
able to use a common framework to work with patient information acquired in any 
of the health and life science disciplines. Patient information collected during 
dental care exposes many of the challenges that confront a wider scale approach. 
For example, to improve the quality of dental care, we must be able to collect 
and analyze data about dental procedures from multiple practices. However, a 
number of challenges make doing so difficult. First, dental electronic health 
record (EHR) information is often stored in complex relational databases that 
are poorly documented. Second, there is not a commonly accepted and implemented 
database schema for dental EHR systems. Third, integrative work that attempts to 
bridge dentistry and other settings in healthcare is made difficult by the 
disconnect between representations of medical information within dental and 
other disciplines' EHR systems. As dentistry increasingly concerns itself with 
the general health of a patient, for example in increased efforts to monitor 
heart health and systemic disease, the impact of this disconnect becomes more 
and more severe. To demonstrate how to address these problems, we have developed 
the open-source Oral Health and Disease Ontology (OHD) and our instance-based 
representation as a framework for dental and medical health care information. We 
envision a time when medical record systems use a common data back end that 
would make interoperating trivial and obviate the need for a dedicated messaging 
framework to move data between systems. The OHD is not yet complete. It includes 
enough to be useful and to demonstrate how it is constructed. We demonstrate its 
utility in an analysis of longevity of dental restorations. Our first narrow use 
case provides a prototype, and is intended demonstrate a prospective design for 
a principled data backend that can be used consistently and encompass both 
dental and medical information in a single framework.
RESULTS: The OHD contains over 1900 classes and 59 relationships. Most of the 
classes and relationships were imported from existing OBO Foundry ontologies. 
Using the LSW2 (LISP Semantic Web) software library, we translated data from a 
dental practice's EHR system into a corresponding Web Ontology Language (OWL) 
representation based on the OHD framework. The OWL representation was then 
loaded into a triple store, and as a proof of concept, we addressed a question 
of clinical relevance - a survival analysis of the longevity of resin filling 
restorations. We provide queries using SPARQL and statistical analysis code in R 
to demonstrate how to perform clinical research using a framework such as the 
OHD, and we compare our results with previous studies.
CONCLUSIONS: This proof-of-concept project translated data from a single 
practice. By using dental practice data, we demonstrate that the OHD and the 
instance-based approach are sufficient to represent data generated in 
real-world, routine clinical settings. While the OHD is applicable to 
integration of data from multiple practices with different dental EHR systems, 
we intend our work to be understood as a prospective design for EHR data storage 
that would simplify medical informatics. The system has well-understood 
semantics because of our use of BFO-based realist ontology and its 
representation in OWL. The data model is a well-defined web standard.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-020-00222-0
PMCID: PMC7439527
PMID: 32819435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.