---
reference_id: PMID:27152146
title: "The Non-Coding RNA Ontology (NCRO): a comprehensive resource for the unification of non-coding RNA biology."
authors:
- Huang J
- Eilbeck K
- Smith B
- Blake JA
- Dou D
- Huang W
- Natale DA
- Ruttenberg A
- Huan J
- Zimmermann MT
- Jiang G
- Lin Y
- Wu B
- Strachan HJ
- He Y
- Zhang S
- Wang X
- Liu Z
- Borchert GM
- Tan M
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0066-0
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- "RNA, Untranslated/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Non-Coding RNA Ontology (NCRO): a comprehensive resource for the unification of non-coding RNA biology.
**Authors:** Huang J, Eilbeck K, Smith B, Blake JA, Dou D, Huang W, Natale DA, Ruttenberg A, Huan J, Zimmermann MT, Jiang G, Lin Y, Wu B, Strachan HJ, He Y, Zhang S, Wang X, Liu Z, Borchert GM, Tan M
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-016-0066-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-016-0066-0)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 May 4;7:24. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0066-0.
eCollection  2016.

The Non-Coding RNA Ontology (NCRO): a comprehensive resource for the unification 
of non-coding RNA biology.

Huang J(1), Eilbeck K(2), Smith B(3), Blake JA(4), Dou D(5), Huang W(6), Natale 
DA(7), Ruttenberg A(8), Huan J(9), Zimmermann MT(10), Jiang G(10), Lin Y(11), Wu 
B(12), Strachan HJ(1), He Y(13), Zhang S(14), Wang X(15), Liu Z(16), Borchert 
GM(17), Tan M(16).

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, 36688-0002 
USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
84112-5775 Utah USA.
(3)Department of Philosophy, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, 14260-4150 New York 
USA.
(4)Genome Informatics, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, 04609-1523 
USA.
(5)Computer and Information Science Department, University of Oregon, Eugene, 
Oregon, 97403-1202 USA.
(6)Miracle Query, Inc., Eugene, Oregon, 97403-1202 USA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown 
University Medical Center, Washington D.C., 20007-1485 USA.
(8)School of Dental Medicine, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, 14214-8006 New 
York USA.
(9)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of 
Kansas, Lawrence, 66047-7621 Kansas USA.
(10)Health Sciences Research, Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, 
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 55905-0001 Minnesota USA.
(11)Center for Computational Science, University of Miami, Miami, 33146-2960 
Florida USA.
(12)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, First Affiliated Hospital, Kunming 
Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, 650032 China.
(13)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48109-5624 USA.
(14)Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, 
32816-2362 Florida USA.
(15)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri, 63110-0001 USA.
(16)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, 
36604-1405 USA.
(17)Department of Biology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, 
36688-0002 USA.

In recent years, sequencing technologies have enabled the identification of a 
wide range of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). Unfortunately, annotation and 
integration of ncRNA data has lagged behind their identification. Given the 
large quantity of information being obtained in this area, there emerges an 
urgent need to integrate what is being discovered by a broad range of relevant 
communities. To this end, the Non-Coding RNA Ontology (NCRO) is being developed 
to provide a systematically structured and precisely defined controlled 
vocabulary for the domain of ncRNAs, thereby facilitating the discovery, 
curation, analysis, exchange, and reasoning of data about structures of ncRNAs, 
their molecular and cellular functions, and their impacts upon phenotypes. The 
goal of NCRO is to serve as a common resource for annotations of diverse 
research in a way that will significantly enhance integrative and comparative 
analysis of the myriad resources currently housed in disparate sources. It is 
our belief that the NCRO ontology can perform an important role in the 
comprehensive unification of ncRNA biology and, indeed, fill a critical gap in 
both the Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) Library and the 
National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) BioPortal. Our initial focus is 
on the ontological representation of small regulatory ncRNAs, which we see as 
the first step in providing a resource for the annotation of data about all 
forms of ncRNAs. The NCRO ontology is free and open to all users, accessible at: 
http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/ncro.owl.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0066-0
PMCID: PMC4857245
PMID: 27152146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]