---
reference_id: PMID:24533660
title: "Variation ontology: annotator guide."
authors:
- Vihinen M
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variation ontology: annotator guide.
**Authors:** Vihinen M
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-9)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Feb 17;5(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-9.

Variation ontology: annotator guide.

Vihinen M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, BMC D10, 
SE-22184 Lund, Sweden. mauno.vihinen@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: Systematic representation of information related to genetic and 
non-genetic variations is required to allow large scale studies, data mining and 
data integration, and to make it possible to reveal novel relationships between 
genotype and phenotype. Although lots of variation data is available it is often 
difficult to use due to lack of systematics.
RESULTS: A novel ontology, Variation Ontology (VariO 
http://variationontology.org), was developed for annotation of effects, 
consequences and mechanisms of variations. In this article instructions are 
provided on how VariO annotations are made. The major levels for description are 
the three molecules, namely DNA, RNA and protein. They are further divided to 
four major sublevels: variation type, function, structure, and property, and 
further up to eight sublevels. VariO annotation summarizes existing knowledge 
about a variation and its effects and formalizes it so that computational 
analyses are efficient. The annotations should be made on as many levels as 
possible. VariO annotations are made in reference to normal states, which vary 
for each data item including e.g. reference sequences, wild type properties, and 
activities.
CONCLUSIONS: Detailed instructions together with examples are provided to 
indicate how VariO can be used for annotation of variations and their effects. A 
dedicated tool has been developed for annotation and will be further developed 
to cover also evidence for the annotations. VariO is suitable for annotation of 
data in many types of databases. As several different kinds of databases are in 
a process of adapting VariO annotations it is important to have guidelines to 
guarantee consistent annotation.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-9
PMCID: PMC3931275
PMID: 24533660