---
reference_id: PMID:17947324
title: "ChemBank: a small-molecule screening and cheminformatics resource database."
authors:
- Seiler KP
- George GA
- Happ MP
- Bodycombe NE
- Carrinski HA
- Norton S
- Brudz S
- Sullivan JP
- Muhlich J
- Serrano M
- Ferraiolo P
- Tolliday NJ
- Schreiber SL
- Clemons PA
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm843
keywords:
- Biological Assay
- Cell Line
- Chemical Phenomena
- Chemistry
- Computational Biology
- Computer Graphics
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- Internet
- Pharmaceutical Preparations/chemistry
- Software
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ChemBank: a small-molecule screening and cheminformatics resource database.
**Authors:** Seiler KP, George GA, Happ MP, Bodycombe NE, Carrinski HA, Norton S, Brudz S, Sullivan JP, Muhlich J, Serrano M, Ferraiolo P, Tolliday NJ, Schreiber SL, Clemons PA
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkm843](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm843)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(Database issue):D351-9. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkm843.  Epub 2007 Oct 18.

ChemBank: a small-molecule screening and cheminformatics resource database.

Seiler KP(1), George GA, Happ MP, Bodycombe NE, Carrinski HA, Norton S, Brudz S, 
Sullivan JP, Muhlich J, Serrano M, Ferraiolo P, Tolliday NJ, Schreiber SL, 
Clemons PA.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology Program and Platform, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 7 
Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

ChemBank (http://chembank.broad.harvard.edu/) is a public, web-based informatics 
environment developed through a collaboration between the Chemical Biology 
Program and Platform at the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT. This knowledge 
environment includes freely available data derived from small molecules and 
small-molecule screens and resources for studying these data. ChemBank is unique 
among small-molecule databases in its dedication to the storage of raw screening 
data, its rigorous definition of screening experiments in terms of statistical 
hypothesis testing, and its metadata-based organization of screening experiments 
into projects involving collections of related assays. ChemBank stores an 
increasingly varied set of measurements derived from cells and other biological 
assay systems treated with small molecules. Analysis tools are available and are 
continuously being developed that allow the relationships between small 
molecules, cell measurements, and cell states to be studied. Currently, ChemBank 
stores information on hundreds of thousands of small molecules and hundreds of 
biomedically relevant assays that have been performed at the Broad Institute by 
collaborators from the worldwide research community. The goal of ChemBank is to 
provide life scientists unfettered access to biomedically relevant data and 
tools heretofore available primarily in the private sector.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm843
PMCID: PMC2238881
PMID: 17947324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]