---
reference_id: PMID:17991681
title: "miRBase: tools for microRNA genomics."
authors:
- Griffiths-Jones S
- Saini HK
- van Dongen S
- Enright AJ
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm952
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Gene Silencing
- Genomics
- Humans
- Internet
- Mice
- "MicroRNAs/chemistry, genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Software
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# miRBase: tools for microRNA genomics.
**Authors:** Griffiths-Jones S, Saini HK, van Dongen S, Enright AJ
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkm952](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm952)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(Database issue):D154-8. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkm952.  Epub 2007 Nov 8.

miRBase: tools for microRNA genomics.

Griffiths-Jones S(1), Saini HK, van Dongen S, Enright AJ.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, 
Oxford Road, Manchester, UK. sam.griffiths-jones@manchester.ac.uk

miRBase is the central online repository for microRNA (miRNA) nomenclature, 
sequence data, annotation and target prediction. The current release (10.0) 
contains 5071 miRNA loci from 58 species, expressing 5922 distinct mature miRNA 
sequences: a growth of over 2000 sequences in the past 2 years. miRBase provides 
a range of data to facilitate studies of miRNA genomics: all miRNAs are mapped 
to their genomic coordinates. Clusters of miRNA sequences in the genome are 
highlighted, and can be defined and retrieved with any inter-miRNA distance. The 
overlap of miRNA sequences with annotated transcripts, both protein- and 
non-coding, are described. Finally, graphical views of the locations of a wide 
range of genomic features in model organisms allow for the first time the 
prediction of the likely boundaries of many miRNA primary transcripts. miRBase 
is available at http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm952
PMCID: PMC2238936
PMID: 17991681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]