---
reference_id: PMID:33021900
title: "The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: Enabling Collaborative Research and Co-Designing of New Planetary Health Applications."
authors:
- Nembaware V
- Mazandu GK
- Hotchkiss J
- Safari Serufuri JM
- Kent J
- Kengne AP
- Anie K
- Munung NS
- Bukini D
- Bitoungui VJN
- Munube D
- Chirwa U
- Chunda-Liyoka C
- Jonathan A
- Flor-Park MV
- Esoh KK
- Jonas M
- Mnika K
- Oosterwyk C
- Masamu U
- Morrice J
- Uwineza A
- Nguweneza A
- Banda K
- Nyanor I
- Adjei DN
- Siebu NE
- Nkanyemka M
- Kuona P
- Tayo BO
- Campbell A
- Oron AP
- Nnodu OE
- Painstil V
- Makani J
- Mulder N
- Wonkam A
journal: OMICS
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1089/omi.2020.0153
keywords:
- "Anemia, Sickle Cell/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- Animals
- Disease Management
- Disease Susceptibility
- Humans
- Research
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: Enabling Collaborative Research and Co-Designing of New Planetary Health Applications.
**Authors:** Nembaware V, Mazandu GK, Hotchkiss J, Safari Serufuri JM, Kent J, Kengne AP, Anie K, Munung NS, Bukini D, Bitoungui VJN, Munube D, Chirwa U, Chunda-Liyoka C, Jonathan A, Flor-Park MV, Esoh KK, Jonas M, Mnika K, Oosterwyk C, Masamu U, Morrice J, Uwineza A, Nguweneza A, Banda K, Nyanor I, Adjei DN, Siebu NE, Nkanyemka M, Kuona P, Tayo BO, Campbell A, Oron AP, Nnodu OE, Painstil V, Makani J, Mulder N, Wonkam A
**Journal:** OMICS (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1089/omi.2020.0153](https://doi.org/10.1089/omi.2020.0153)

## Content

1. OMICS. 2020 Oct;24(10):559-567. doi: 10.1089/omi.2020.0153.

The Sickle Cell Disease Ontology: Enabling Collaborative Research and 
Co-Designing of New Planetary Health Applications.

Nembaware V(1), Mazandu GK(1), Hotchkiss J(1), Safari Serufuri JM(1), Kent J(2), 
Kengne AP(3), Anie K(4)(5), Munung NS(1), Bukini D(2), Bitoungui VJN(6), Munube 
D(7), Chirwa U(8), Chunda-Liyoka C(8), Jonathan A(2), Flor-Park MV(9), Esoh 
KK(10), Jonas M(1), Mnika K(1), Oosterwyk C(1), Masamu U(2), Morrice J(1), 
Uwineza A(11), Nguweneza A(1), Banda K(1), Nyanor I(12), Adjei DN(5), Siebu 
NE(5), Nkanyemka M(2), Kuona P(13), Tayo BO(14), Campbell A(15), Oron AP(16), 
Nnodu OE(17), Painstil V(18), Makani J(2), Mulder N(19), Wonkam A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Sickle Cell Programme, Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences 
(MUHAS), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(3)Non-Communicable Diseases Research Unit, South African Medical Research 
Council, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)London North West University Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(5)Sickle Cell Disease Genomics Network of Africa (SickleGenAfrica), University 
of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Hematology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences of the University of Dschang, Dschang, Cameroon.
(7)Department of Paediatric and Child Health, Makerere University/Mulago 
National Referral Hospital, Kampala, Uganda.
(8)University Teaching Hospitals-Children's Hospital, University of Zambia, 
School of Medicine, Lusaka, Zambia.
(9)Onco-hematology Unit, Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Clínicas, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Jomo Kenyatta University of 
Agriculture and Technology, Juja, Kenya.
(11)University of Rwanda, School of Medicine and Pharmacy, Kigali, Rwanda.
(12)Kumasi Centre for Sickle Cell Disease, Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, 
Accra, Ghana.
(13)University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(14)Department of Public Health Sciences, Parkinson School of Health Sciences 
and Public Health, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(15)Division of Hematology, Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's 
National Medical Center, George Washington University School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(16)Maternal, Newborn and Child Health, Institute for Disease Modeling, 
Bellevue, Washington, USA.
(17)Centre of Excellence for Sickle Cell Disease Research and Training, 
University of Abuja, Abuja, Nigeria.
(18)Department of Child Health, Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, Ghana.
(19)Computational Biology Division, Faculty of Health Sciences, Cape Town, South 
Africa.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is one of the most common blood disorders impacting 
planetary health. Over 300,000 newborns are diagnosed with SCD each year 
globally, with an increasing trend. The sickle cell disease ontology (SCDO) is 
the most comprehensive multidisciplinary SCD knowledge portal. The SCDO was 
collaboratively developed by the SCDO working group, which includes experts in 
SCD and data standards from across the globe. This expert review presents 
highlights and lessons learned from the fourth SCDO workshop that marked the 
beginning of applications toward planetary health impact, and with an eye to 
empower and cultivate multisite SCD collaborative research. The workshop was 
organized by the Sickle Africa Data Coordinating Center (SADaCC) and attended by 
44 participants from 14 countries, with 2 participants connecting remotely. 
Notably, from the standpoint of democratizing and innovating scientific meeting 
design, an SCD patient advocate also presented at the workshop, giving a broader 
real-life perspective on patients' aspirations, needs, and challenges. A major 
component of the workshop was new approaches to harness SCDO to harmonize data 
elements used by different studies. This was facilitated by a web-based platform 
onto which participants uploaded data elements from previous or ongoing 
SCD-relevant research studies before the workshop, making multisite 
collaborative research studies based on existing SCD data possible, including 
multisite cohort, SCD global clinical trials, and SCD community engagement 
approaches. Trainees presented proposals for systematic literature reviews in 
key SCD research areas. This expert review emphasizes potential and prospects of 
SCDO-enabled data standards and harmonization to facilitate large-scale global 
SCD collaborative initiatives. As the fields of public and global health 
continue to broaden toward planetary health, the SCDO is well poised to play a 
prominent role to decipher SCD pathophysiology further, and co-design 
diagnostics and therapeutics innovation in the field.

DOI: 10.1089/omi.2020.0153
PMCID: PMC7549008
PMID: 33021900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflicting 
financial interests.