---
reference_id: PMID:16779026
title: "Challenges in converting frame-based ontology into OWL: the Foundational Model of Anatomy case-study."
authors:
- Dameron O
- Rubin DL
- Musen MA
journal: AMIA Annu Symp Proc
year: '2005'
keywords:
- Anatomy/classification
- Humans
- Internet
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Challenges in converting frame-based ontology into OWL: the Foundational Model of Anatomy case-study.
**Authors:** Dameron O, Rubin DL, Musen MA
**Journal:** AMIA Annu Symp Proc (2005)

## Content

1. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2005;2005:181-5.

Challenges in converting frame-based ontology into OWL: the Foundational Model 
of Anatomy case-study.

Dameron O(1), Rubin DL, Musen MA.

Author information:
(1)Stanford Medical Informatics, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

A description logics representation of the Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) 
in the Web Ontology Language (OWL-DL) would allow developers to combine it with 
other OWL ontologies, and would provide the benefit of being able to access 
generic reasoning tools. However, the FMA is currently represented in a frame 
language. The differences between description logics and frames are not only 
syntactic, but also semantic. We analyze some theoretical and computational 
limitations of converting the FMA into OWL-DL. Namely, some of the constructs 
used in the FMA do not have a direct equivalent in description logics, and a 
complete conversion of the FMA in description logics is too large to support 
reasoning. Therefore, an OWL-DL representation of the FMA would have to be 
optimized for each application. We propose a solution based on OWL-Full, a 
superlanguage of OWL-DL, that meets the expressiveness requirements and remains 
application-independent. Specific simplified OWL-DL representations can then be 
generated from the OWL-Full model by applications. We argue that this solution 
is easier to implement and closer to the application needs than an integral 
translation, and that the latter approach would only make the FMA maintenance 
more difficult.

PMCID: PMC1560487
PMID: 16779026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]