---
reference_id: PMID:34986597
title: "HMDB 5.0: the Human Metabolome Database for 2022."
authors:
- Wishart DS
- Guo A
- Oler E
- Wang F
- Anjum A
- Peters H
- Dizon R
- Sayeeda Z
- Tian S
- Lee BL
- Berjanskii M
- Mah R
- Yamamoto M
- Jovel J
- Torres-Calzada C
- Hiebert-Giesbrecht M
- Lui VW
- Varshavi D
- Varshavi D
- Allen D
- Arndt D
- Khetarpal N
- Sivakumaran A
- Harford K
- Sanford S
- Yee K
- Cao X
- Budinski Z
- Liigand J
- Zhang L
- Zheng J
- Mandal R
- Karu N
- Dambrova M
- Schiöth HB
- Greiner R
- Gautam V
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1062
keywords:
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Humans
- Lipidomics/classification
- Mass Spectrometry
- Metabolome/genetics
- Metabolomics/classification
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HMDB 5.0: the Human Metabolome Database for 2022.
**Authors:** Wishart DS, Guo A, Oler E, Wang F, Anjum A, Peters H, Dizon R, Sayeeda Z, Tian S, Lee BL, Berjanskii M, Mah R, Yamamoto M, Jovel J, Torres-Calzada C, Hiebert-Giesbrecht M, Lui VW, Varshavi D, Varshavi D, Allen D, Arndt D, Khetarpal N, Sivakumaran A, Harford K, Sanford S, Yee K, Cao X, Budinski Z, Liigand J, Zhang L, Zheng J, Mandal R, Karu N, Dambrova M, Schiöth HB, Greiner R, Gautam V
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab1062](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1062)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D622-D631. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1062.

HMDB 5.0: the Human Metabolome Database for 2022.

Wishart DS(1)(2)(3)(4), Guo A(1), Oler E(1), Wang F(2), Anjum A(2), Peters H(1), 
Dizon R(1), Sayeeda Z(2), Tian S(1), Lee BL(1), Berjanskii M(1), Mah R(1), 
Yamamoto M(1), Jovel J(1), Torres-Calzada C(1), Hiebert-Giesbrecht M(1), Lui 
VW(1), Varshavi D(1), Varshavi D(1), Allen D(1), Arndt D(1), Khetarpal N(1), 
Sivakumaran A(1), Harford K(1), Sanford S(1), Yee K(1), Cao X(1), Budinski Z(1), 
Liigand J(1), Zhang L(1), Zheng J(1), Mandal R(1), Karu N(5), Dambrova M(6), 
Schiöth HB(7)(8), Greiner R(2), Gautam V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 
2E9, Canada.
(2)Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada.
(5)Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research LACDR/Analytical Biosciences, Leiden 
University, Leiden, Netherlands.
(6)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Pharmacology, Latvian Institute of Organic 
Synthesis, Riga, Latvia.
(7)Section of Functional Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(8)Institute for Translational Medicine and Biotechnology, Sechenov First Moscow 
State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.

The Human Metabolome Database or HMDB (https://hmdb.ca) has been providing 
comprehensive reference information about human metabolites and their associated 
biological, physiological and chemical properties since 2007. Over the past 15 
years, the HMDB has grown and evolved significantly to meet the needs of the 
metabolomics community and respond to continuing changes in internet and 
computing technology. This year's update, HMDB 5.0, brings a number of important 
improvements and upgrades to the database. These should make the HMDB more 
useful and more appealing to a larger cross-section of users. In particular, 
these improvements include: (i) a significant increase in the number of 
metabolite entries (from 114 100 to 217 920 compounds); (ii) enhancements to the 
quality and depth of metabolite descriptions; (iii) the addition of new 
structure, spectral and pathway visualization tools; (iv) the inclusion of many 
new and much more accurately predicted spectral data sets, including predicted 
NMR spectra, more accurately predicted MS spectra, predicted retention indices 
and predicted collision cross section data and (v) enhancements to the HMDB's 
search functions to facilitate better compound identification. Many other minor 
improvements and updates to the content, the interface, and general performance 
of the HMDB website have also been made. Overall, we believe these upgrades and 
updates should greatly enhance the HMDB's ease of use and its potential 
applications not only in human metabolomics but also in exposomics, lipidomics, 
nutritional science, biochemistry and clinical chemistry.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1062
PMCID: PMC8728138
PMID: 34986597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]