---
reference_id: PMID:12520019
title: The Protein Information Resource.
authors:
- Wu CH
- Yeh LS
- Huang H
- Arminski L
- Castro-Alvear J
- Chen Y
- Hu Z
- Kourtesis P
- Ledley RS
- Suzek BE
- Vinayaka CR
- Zhang J
- Barker WC
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkg040
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Databases, Bibliographic"
- "Databases, Protein"
- Internet
- "Proteins/chemistry, classification, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Protein Information Resource.
**Authors:** Wu CH, Yeh LS, Huang H, Arminski L, Castro-Alvear J, Chen Y, Hu Z, Kourtesis P, Ledley RS, Suzek BE, Vinayaka CR, Zhang J, Barker WC
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkg040](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkg040)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jan 1;31(1):345-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkg040.

The Protein Information Resource.

Wu CH(1), Yeh LS, Huang H, Arminski L, Castro-Alvear J, Chen Y, Hu Z, Kourtesis 
P, Ledley RS, Suzek BE, Vinayaka CR, Zhang J, Barker WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University 
Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Road, NW, Box 571414, Washington, DC 20057-1414, 
USA. pirmail@georgetown.edu

The Protein Information Resource (PIR) is an integrated public resource of 
protein informatics that supports genomic and proteomic research and scientific 
discovery. PIR maintains the Protein Sequence Database (PSD), an annotated 
protein database containing over 283 000 sequences covering the entire taxonomic 
range. Family classification is used for sensitive identification, consistent 
annotation, and detection of annotation errors. The superfamily curation defines 
signature domain architecture and categorizes memberships to improve automated 
classification. To increase the amount of experimental annotation, the PIR has 
developed a bibliography system for literature searching, mapping, and user 
submission, and has conducted retrospective attribution of citations for 
experimental features. PIR also maintains NREF, a non-redundant reference 
database, and iProClass, an integrated database of protein family, function, and 
structure information. PIR-NREF provides a timely and comprehensive collection 
of protein sequences, currently consisting of more than 1 000 000 entries from 
PIR-PSD, SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL, RefSeq, GenPept, and PDB. The PIR web site 
(http://pir.georgetown.edu) connects data analysis tools to underlying databases 
for information retrieval and knowledge discovery, with functionalities for 
interactive queries, combinations of sequence and text searches, and sorting and 
visual exploration of search results. The FTP site provides free download for 
PSD and NREF biweekly releases and auxiliary databases and files.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkg040
PMCID: PMC165487
PMID: 12520019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]