---
reference_id: PMID:15360858
title: "VA National Drug File Reference Terminology: a cross-institutional content coverage study."
authors:
- Brown SH
- Elkin PL
- Rosenbloom ST
- Husser C
- Bauer BA
- Lincoln MJ
- Carter J
- Erlbaum M
- Tuttle MS
journal: Stud Health Technol Inform
year: '2004'
keywords:
- Abstracting and Indexing
- Algorithms
- "Hospitals, Group Practice"
- Information Storage and Retrieval
- Logic
- "Medical Records Systems, Computerized"
- "Medication Systems, Hospital"
- Minnesota
- Pharmaceutical Preparations/classification
- Software
- United States
- United States Department of Veterans Affairs
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# VA National Drug File Reference Terminology: a cross-institutional content coverage study.
**Authors:** Brown SH, Elkin PL, Rosenbloom ST, Husser C, Bauer BA, Lincoln MJ, Carter J, Erlbaum M, Tuttle MS
**Journal:** Stud Health Technol Inform (2004)

## Content

1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2004;107(Pt 1):477-81.

VA National Drug File Reference Terminology: a cross-institutional content 
coverage study.

Brown SH(1), Elkin PL, Rosenbloom ST, Husser C, Bauer BA, Lincoln MJ, Carter J, 
Erlbaum M, Tuttle MS.

Author information:
(1)U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 1310 24th Avenue South, Nashville, TN 
37212, USA. steven.brown@med.va.gov

BACKGROUND: Content coverage studies provide valuable information to potential 
users of terminologies. We detail the VA National Drug File Reference 
Terminology's (NDF-RT) ability to represent dictated medication list phrases 
from the Mayo Clinic. NDF-RT is a description logic-based resource created to 
support clinical operations at one of the largest healthcare providers in the 
US.
METHODS: Medication list phrases were extracted from dictated patient notes from 
the Mayo Clinic. Algorithmic mappings to NDF-RT using the SmartAccess Vocabulary 
Server (SAVS) were presented to two non-VA physicians. The physicians used a 
terminology browser to determine the accuracy of the algorithmic mapping and the 
content coverage of NDF-RT.
RESULTS: The 509 extracted documents on 300 patients contained 847 medication 
concepts in medication lists. NDF-RT covered 97.8% of concepts. Of the 18 
phrases that NDF-RT did not represent, 10 were for OTC's and food supplements, 5 
were for prescription medications, and 3 were missing synonyms. The SAVS engine 
properly mapped 773 of 810 phrases with an overall sensitivity (precision) was 
95.4% and positive predictive value (recall) of 99.9%.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that NDF-RT has more general utility than 
its initial design parameters dictated

PMID: 15360858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]