---
reference_id: PMID:22621763
title: "The Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL): towards a consistent vocabulary of lifecycle stages in parasitic organisms."
authors:
- Parikh PP
- Zheng J
- Logan-Klumpler F
- Stoeckert CJ Jr
- Louis C
- Topalis P
- Protasio AV
- Sheth AP
- Carrington M
- Berriman M
- Sahoo SS
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL): towards a consistent vocabulary of lifecycle stages in parasitic organisms.
**Authors:** Parikh PP, Zheng J, Logan-Klumpler F, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Louis C, Topalis P, Protasio AV, Sheth AP, Carrington M, Berriman M, Sahoo SS
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-3-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-3-5)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2012 May 23;3(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-5.

The Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL): towards a consistent vocabulary of 
lifecycle stages in parasitic organisms.

Parikh PP(1), Zheng J, Logan-Klumpler F, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Louis C, Topalis P, 
Protasio AV, Sheth AP, Carrington M, Berriman M, Sahoo SS.

Author information:
(1)The Kno,e,sis Center, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Wright 
State University, Dayton, OH, USA. priti@knoesis.org.

BACKGROUND: Genome sequencing of many eukaryotic pathogens and the volume of 
data available on public resources have created a clear requirement for a 
consistent vocabulary to describe the range of developmental forms of parasites. 
Consistent labeling of experimental data and external data, in databases and the 
literature, is essential for integration, cross database comparison, and 
knowledge discovery. The primary objective of this work was to develop a dynamic 
and controlled vocabulary that can be used for various parasites. The paper 
describes the Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL) and discusses its 
application in parasite research.
RESULTS: The OPL is based on the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) and follows the 
rules set by the OBO Foundry consortium. The first version of the OPL models 
complex life cycle stage details of a range of parasites, such as Trypanosoma 
sp., Leishmaniasp., Plasmodium sp., and Shicstosoma sp. In addition, the 
ontology also models necessary contextual details, such as host information, 
vector information, and anatomical locations. OPL is primarily designed to serve 
as a reference ontology for parasite life cycle stages that can be used for 
database annotation purposes and in the lab for data integration or information 
retrieval as exemplified in the application section below.
CONCLUSION: OPL is freely available at http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/opl.owl 
and has been submitted to the BioPortal site of NCBO and to the OBO Foundry. We 
believe that database and phenotype annotations using OPL will help run 
fundamental queries on databases to know more about gene functions and to find 
intervention targets for various parasites. The OPL is under continuous 
development and new parasites and/or terms are being added.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-5
PMCID: PMC3488002
PMID: 22621763