---
reference_id: PMID:24267899
title: "Rat Strain Ontology: structured controlled vocabulary designed to facilitate access to strain data at RGD."
authors:
- Nigam R
- Munzenmaier DH
- Worthey EA
- Dwinell MR
- Shimoyama M
- Jacob HJ
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-36
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rat Strain Ontology: structured controlled vocabulary designed to facilitate access to strain data at RGD.
**Authors:** Nigam R, Munzenmaier DH, Worthey EA, Dwinell MR, Shimoyama M, Jacob HJ
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-36](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-36)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Nov 22;4(1):36. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-36.

Rat Strain Ontology: structured controlled vocabulary designed to facilitate 
access to strain data at RGD.

Nigam R(1), Munzenmaier DH, Worthey EA, Dwinell MR, Shimoyama M, Jacob HJ.

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 
Watertown Plank Rd, Milwaukee 53226-3548, WI, USA. rnigam@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Rat Genome Database (RGD) ( http://rgd.mcw.edu/) is the premier 
site for comprehensive data on the different strains of the laboratory rat 
(Rattus norvegicus). The strain data are collected from various publications, 
direct submissions from individual researchers, and rat providers worldwide. Rat 
strain, substrain designation and nomenclature follow the Guidelines for 
Nomenclature of Mouse and Rat Strains, instituted by the International Committee 
on Standardized Genetic Nomenclature for Mice. While symbols and names aid in 
identifying strains correctly, the flat nature of this information prohibits 
easy search and retrieval, as well as other data mining functions. In order to 
improve these functionalities, particularly in ontology-based tools, the Rat 
Strain Ontology (RS) was developed.
RESULTS: The Rat Strain Ontology (RS) reflects the breeding history, parental 
background, and genetic manipulation of rat strains. This controlled vocabulary 
organizes strains by type: inbred, outbred, chromosome altered, congenic, mutant 
and so on. In addition, under the chromosome altered category, strains are 
organized by chromosome, and further by type of manipulations, such as mutant or 
congenic. This allows users to easily retrieve strains of interest with 
modifications in specific genomic regions. The ontology was developed using the 
Open Biological and Biomedical Ontology (OBO) file format, and is organized on 
the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure. Rat Strain Ontology IDs are included 
as part of the strain report (RS: ######).
CONCLUSIONS: As rat researchers are often unaware of the number of substrains or 
altered strains within a breeding line, this vocabulary now provides an easy way 
to retrieve all substrains and accompanying information. Its usefulness is 
particularly evident in tools such as the PhenoMiner at RGD, where users can now 
easily retrieve phenotype measurement data for related strains, strains with 
similar backgrounds or those with similar introgressed regions. This controlled 
vocabulary also allows better retrieval and filtering for QTLs and in genomic 
tools such as the GViewer.The Rat Strain Ontology has been incorporated into the 
RGD Ontology Browser ( 
http://rgd.mcw.edu/rgdweb/ontology/view.html?acc_id=RS:0000457#s) and is 
available through the National Center for Biomedical Ontology ( 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1150) or the RGD ftp site ( 
ftp://rgd.mcw.edu/pub/ontology/rat_strain/).

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-36
PMCID: PMC4177145
PMID: 24267899