---
reference_id: PMID:34616062
title: "Comparative cellular analysis of motor cortex in human, marmoset and mouse."
authors:
- Bakken TE
- Jorstad NL
- Hu Q
- Lake BB
- Tian W
- Kalmbach BE
- Crow M
- Hodge RD
- Krienen FM
- Sorensen SA
- Eggermont J
- Yao Z
- Aevermann BD
- Aldridge AI
- Bartlett A
- Bertagnolli D
- Casper T
- Castanon RG
- Crichton K
- Daigle TL
- Dalley R
- Dee N
- Dembrow N
- Diep D
- Ding SL
- Dong W
- Fang R
- Fischer S
- Goldman M
- Goldy J
- Graybuck LT
- Herb BR
- Hou X
- Kancherla J
- Kroll M
- Lathia K
- van Lew B
- Li YE
- Liu CS
- Liu H
- Lucero JD
- Mahurkar A
- McMillen D
- Miller JA
- Moussa M
- Nery JR
- Nicovich PR
- Niu SY
- Orvis J
- Osteen JK
- Owen S
- Palmer CR
- Pham T
- Plongthongkum N
- Poirion O
- Reed NM
- Rimorin C
- Rivkin A
- Romanow WJ
- Sedeño-Cortés AE
- Siletti K
- Somasundaram S
- Sulc J
- Tieu M
- Torkelson A
- Tung H
- Wang X
- Xie F
- Yanny AM
- Zhang R
- Ament SA
- Behrens MM
- Bravo HC
- Chun J
- Dobin A
- Gillis J
- Hertzano R
- Hof PR
- Höllt T
- Horwitz GD
- Keene CD
- Kharchenko PV
- Ko AL
- Lelieveldt BP
- Luo C
- Mukamel EA
- Pinto-Duarte A
- Preissl S
- Regev A
- Ren B
- Scheuermann RH
- Smith K
- Spain WJ
- White OR
- Koch C
- Hawrylycz M
- Tasic B
- Macosko EZ
- McCarroll SA
- Ting JT
- Zeng H
- Zhang K
- Feng G
- Ecker JR
- Linnarsson S
- Lein ES
journal: Nature
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03465-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Atlases as Topic
- Callithrix/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Epigenomics
- Female
- "GABAergic Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Glutamates/metabolism
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- "Motor Cortex/anatomy & histology, cytology"
- "Neurons/classification, cytology, metabolism"
- Organ Specificity
- Phylogeny
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Species Specificity
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative cellular analysis of motor cortex in human, marmoset and mouse.
**Authors:** Bakken TE, Jorstad NL, Hu Q, Lake BB, Tian W, Kalmbach BE, Crow M, Hodge RD, Krienen FM, Sorensen SA, Eggermont J, Yao Z, Aevermann BD, Aldridge AI, Bartlett A, Bertagnolli D, Casper T, Castanon RG, Crichton K, Daigle TL, Dalley R, Dee N, Dembrow N, Diep D, Ding SL, Dong W, Fang R, Fischer S, Goldman M, Goldy J, Graybuck LT, Herb BR, Hou X, Kancherla J, Kroll M, Lathia K, van Lew B, Li YE, Liu CS, Liu H, Lucero JD, Mahurkar A, McMillen D, Miller JA, Moussa M, Nery JR, Nicovich PR, Niu SY, Orvis J, Osteen JK, Owen S, Palmer CR, Pham T, Plongthongkum N, Poirion O, Reed NM, Rimorin C, Rivkin A, Romanow WJ, Sedeño-Cortés AE, Siletti K, Somasundaram S, Sulc J, Tieu M, Torkelson A, Tung H, Wang X, Xie F, Yanny AM, Zhang R, Ament SA, Behrens MM, Bravo HC, Chun J, Dobin A, Gillis J, Hertzano R, Hof PR, Höllt T, Horwitz GD, Keene CD, Kharchenko PV, Ko AL, Lelieveldt BP, Luo C, Mukamel EA, Pinto-Duarte A, Preissl S, Regev A, Ren B, Scheuermann RH, Smith K, Spain WJ, White OR, Koch C, Hawrylycz M, Tasic B, Macosko EZ, McCarroll SA, Ting JT, Zeng H, Zhang K, Feng G, Ecker JR, Linnarsson S, Lein ES
**Journal:** Nature (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-021-03465-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03465-8)

## Content

1. Nature. 2021 Oct;598(7879):111-119. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03465-8. Epub 2021
 Oct 6.

Comparative cellular analysis of motor cortex in human, marmoset and mouse.

Bakken TE(1), Jorstad NL(2), Hu Q(3), Lake BB(4), Tian W(5), Kalmbach BE(2)(6), 
Crow M(7), Hodge RD(2), Krienen FM(8), Sorensen SA(2), Eggermont J(9), Yao Z(2), 
Aevermann BD(10), Aldridge AI(11), Bartlett A(11), Bertagnolli D(2), Casper 
T(2), Castanon RG(11), Crichton K(2), Daigle TL(2), Dalley R(2), Dee N(2), 
Dembrow N(6)(12), Diep D(4), Ding SL(2), Dong W(4), Fang R(13), Fischer S(7), 
Goldman M(8), Goldy J(2), Graybuck LT(2), Herb BR(14), Hou X(15), Kancherla 
J(16), Kroll M(2), Lathia K(2), van Lew B(9), Li YE(15)(17), Liu CS(18)(19), Liu 
H(11), Lucero JD(5), Mahurkar A(14), McMillen D(2), Miller JA(2), Moussa M(20), 
Nery JR(11), Nicovich PR(2), Niu SY(11)(21), Orvis J(14), Osteen JK(5), Owen 
S(2), Palmer CR(18)(19), Pham T(2), Plongthongkum N(4), Poirion O(15), Reed 
NM(8), Rimorin C(2), Rivkin A(5), Romanow WJ(18), Sedeño-Cortés AE(2), Siletti 
K(22), Somasundaram S(2), Sulc J(2), Tieu M(2), Torkelson A(2), Tung H(2), Wang 
X(23), Xie F(24), Yanny AM(2), Zhang R(10), Ament SA(14), Behrens MM(5), Bravo 
HC(16), Chun J(18), Dobin A(25), Gillis J(7), Hertzano R(26), Hof PR(27), Höllt 
T(28), Horwitz GD(29), Keene CD(30), Kharchenko PV(3), Ko AL(31)(32), Lelieveldt 
BP(9)(33), Luo C(34), Mukamel EA(35), Pinto-Duarte A(5), Preissl S(15), Regev 
A(36), Ren B(15)(17), Scheuermann RH(10)(37)(38), Smith K(2), Spain WJ(6)(12), 
White OR(14), Koch C(2), Hawrylycz M(2), Tasic B(2), Macosko EZ(36), McCarroll 
SA(8)(36), Ting JT(2)(6), Zeng H(2), Zhang K(4), Feng G(39)(40)(41), Ecker 
JR(11)(42), Linnarsson S(22), Lein ES(43).

Author information:
(1)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA. 
trygveb@alleninstitute.org.
(2)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(5)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(7)Stanley Institute for Cognitive Genomics, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)LKEB, Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(10)J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(11)Genomic Analysis Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(12)Epilepsy Center of Excellence, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(13)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Graduate Program, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(14)Institute for Genomes Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(15)Center for Epigenomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(16)Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, College 
Park, MD, USA.
(17)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(18)Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(19)Biomedical Sciences Program, School of Medicine, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(20)University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
(21)Computer Science and Engineering Program, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(22)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(23)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, MO, USA.
(24)Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(25)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.
(26)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology, Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(27)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(28)Computer Graphics and Visualization Group, Delt University of Technology, 
Delft, The Netherlands.
(29)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Washington National Primate 
Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(30)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(31)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(32)Regional Epilepsy Center, Harborview Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(33)Pattern Recognition and Bioinformatics group, Delft University of 
Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.
(34)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(35)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(36)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(37)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(38)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(39)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(40)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(41)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(42)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
La Jolla, CA, USA.
(43)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA. edl@alleninstitute.org.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2022 Apr;604(7904):E8. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04562-y.

Comment in
    Nature. 2021 Oct;598(7879):33-34. doi: 10.1038/d41586-021-02493-8.

The primary motor cortex (M1) is essential for voluntary fine-motor control and 
is functionally conserved across mammals1. Here, using high-throughput 
transcriptomic and epigenomic profiling of more than 450,000 single nuclei in 
humans, marmoset monkeys and mice, we demonstrate a broadly conserved cellular 
makeup of this region, with similarities that mirror evolutionary distance and 
are consistent between the transcriptome and epigenome. The core conserved 
molecular identities of neuronal and non-neuronal cell types allow us to 
generate a cross-species consensus classification of cell types, and to infer 
conserved properties of cell types across species. Despite the overall 
conservation, however, many species-dependent specializations are apparent, 
including differences in cell-type proportions, gene expression, DNA methylation 
and chromatin state. Few cell-type marker genes are conserved across species, 
revealing a short list of candidate genes and regulatory mechanisms that are 
responsible for conserved features of homologous cell types, such as the 
GABAergic chandelier cells. This consensus transcriptomic classification allows 
us to use patch-seq (a combination of whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, RNA 
sequencing and morphological characterization) to identify corticospinal Betz 
cells from layer 5 in non-human primates and humans, and to characterize their 
highly specialized physiology and anatomy. These findings highlight the robust 
molecular underpinnings of cell-type diversity in M1 across mammals, and point 
to the genes and regulatory pathways responsible for the functional identity of 
cell types and their species-specific adaptations.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-03465-8
PMCID: PMC8494640
PMID: 34616062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.Re. is an equity holder and founder of Celsius 
Therapeutics, a founder of Immunitas, and a member of the Scientific Advisory 
Board at Syros Pharmaceuticals, Neogene Therapeutics, Asimov and Thermo Fisher 
Scientific. B.R. is a shareholder of Arima Genomics, Inc. K.Z. is a co-founder 
and equity holder and serves on the Scientific Advisory Board of Singlera 
Genomics. P.V.K. serves on the Scientific Advisory Board to Celsius Therapeutics 
Inc.