---
reference_id: PMID:19344873
title: "DECIPHER: Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans Using Ensembl Resources."
authors:
- Firth HV
- Richards SM
- Bevan AP
- Clayton S
- Corpas M
- Rajan D
- Van Vooren S
- Moreau Y
- Pettett RM
- Carter NP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.010
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Female
- Gene Dosage
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genome, Human"
- Humans
- Internet
- Male
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DECIPHER: Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans Using Ensembl Resources.
**Authors:** Firth HV, Richards SM, Bevan AP, Clayton S, Corpas M, Rajan D, Van Vooren S, Moreau Y, Pettett RM, Carter NP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.010)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;84(4):524-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.010. Epub 
2009 Apr 2.

DECIPHER: Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans Using 
Ensembl Resources.

Firth HV(1), Richards SM, Bevan AP, Clayton S, Corpas M, Rajan D, Van Vooren S, 
Moreau Y, Pettett RM, Carter NP.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge University Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. hvf21@cam.ac.uk

Many patients suffering from developmental disorders harbor submicroscopic 
deletions or duplications that, by affecting the copy number of dosage-sensitive 
genes or disrupting normal gene expression, lead to disease. However, many 
aberrations are novel or extremely rare, making clinical interpretation 
problematic and genotype-phenotype correlations uncertain. Identification of 
patients sharing a genomic rearrangement and having phenotypic features in 
common leads to greater certainty in the pathogenic nature of the rearrangement 
and enables new syndromes to be defined. To facilitate the analysis of these 
rare events, we have developed an interactive web-based database called DECIPHER 
(Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans Using Ensembl 
Resources) which incorporates a suite of tools designed to aid the 
interpretation of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalance, inversions, and 
translocations. DECIPHER catalogs common copy-number changes in normal 
populations and thus, by exclusion, enables changes that are novel and 
potentially pathogenic to be identified. DECIPHER enhances genetic counseling by 
retrieving relevant information from a variety of bioinformatics resources. 
Known and predicted genes within an aberration are listed in the DECIPHER 
patient report, and genes of recognized clinical importance are highlighted and 
prioritized. DECIPHER enables clinical scientists worldwide to maintain records 
of phenotype and chromosome rearrangement for their patients and, with informed 
consent, share this information with the wider clinical research community 
through display in the genome browser Ensembl. By sharing cases worldwide, 
clusters of rare cases having phenotype and structural rearrangement in common 
can be identified, leading to the delineation of new syndromes and furthering 
understanding of gene function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.03.010
PMCID: PMC2667985
PMID: 19344873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]