---
reference_id: PMID:28099516
title: "Clinical Practice Guidelines for Rare Diseases: The Orphanet Database."
authors:
- Pavan S
- Rommel K
- Mateo Marquina ME
- Höhn S
- Lanneau V
- Rath A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170365
keywords:
- "Databases, Factual"
- Humans
- Internet
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Rare Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Practice Guidelines for Rare Diseases: The Orphanet Database.
**Authors:** Pavan S, Rommel K, Mateo Marquina ME, Höhn S, Lanneau V, Rath A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0170365](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170365)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 18;12(1):e0170365. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170365. 
eCollection 2017.

Clinical Practice Guidelines for Rare Diseases: The Orphanet Database.

Pavan S(1), Rommel K(2), Mateo Marquina ME(3), Höhn S(1), Lanneau V(1), Rath 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Inserm, US14 - Orphanet, Paris, France.
(2)Orphanet Germany, Centre for Rare Diseases, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(3)Orphanet Spain, CIBERER, Valencia, Spain.

Clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) for rare diseases (RDs) are scarce, may be 
difficult to identify through Internet searches and may vary in quality 
depending on the source and methodology used. In order to contribute to the 
improvement of the diagnosis, treatment and care of patients, Orphanet 
(www.orpha.net) has set up a procedure for the selection, quality evaluation and 
dissemination of CPGs, with the aim to provide easy access to relevant, accurate 
and specific recommendations for the management of RDs. This article provides an 
analysis of selected CPGs by medical domain coverage, prevalence of diseases, 
languages and type of producer, and addresses the variability in CPG quality and 
availability. CPGs are identified via bibliographic databases, websites of 
research networks, expert centres or medical societies. They are assessed 
according to quality criteria derived from the Appraisal of Guidelines, REsearch 
and Evaluation (AGREE II) Instrument. Only open access CPGs and documents for 
which permission from the copyright holders has been obtained are disseminated 
on the Orphanet website. From January 2012 to July 2015, 277 CPGs were 
disseminated, representing coverage of 1,122 groups of diseases, diseases or 
subtypes in the Orphanet database. No language restriction is applied, and so 
far 10 languages are represented, with a predominance of CPGs in English, French 
and German (92% of all CPGs). A large proportion of diseases with identified 
CPGs belong to rare oncologic, neurologic, hematologic diseases or developmental 
anomalies. The Orphanet project on CPG collection, evaluation and dissemination 
is a continuous process, with regular addition of new guidelines, and updates. 
CPGs meeting the quality criteria are integrated to the Orphanet database of 
rare diseases, together with other types of textual information and the 
appropriate services for patients, researchers and healthcare professionals in 
40 countries.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170365
PMCID: PMC5242437
PMID: 28099516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.