---
reference_id: PMID:25276334
title: "The Porifera Ontology (PORO): enhancing sponge systematics with an anatomy ontology."
authors:
- Thacker RW
- Díaz MC
- Kerner A
- Vignes-Lebbe R
- Segerdell E
- Haendel MA
- Mungall CJ
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-39
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Porifera Ontology (PORO): enhancing sponge systematics with an anatomy ontology.
**Authors:** Thacker RW, Díaz MC, Kerner A, Vignes-Lebbe R, Segerdell E, Haendel MA, Mungall CJ
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-39](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-39)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Sep 8;5(1):39. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-39.
eCollection  2014.

The Porifera Ontology (PORO): enhancing sponge systematics with an anatomy 
ontology.

Thacker RW(1), Díaz MC(2), Kerner A(3), Vignes-Lebbe R(3), Segerdell E(4), 
Haendel MA(4), Mungall CJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, USA.
(2)Museo Margarita, Boca de Rio, 6304 Venezuela.
(3)CR2P, UMR 7207 CNRS-MNHN-UPMC, Département Histoire de la Terre, Muséum 
National d'Histoire Naturelle, Bâtiment de Géologie, CP48, 57 rue Cuvier, 75005 
Paris, France.
(4)Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, USA.
(5)Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA USA.

BACKGROUND: Porifera (sponges) are ancient basal metazoans that lack organs. 
They provide insight into key evolutionary transitions, such as the emergence of 
multicellularity and the nervous system. In addition, their ability to 
synthesize unusual compounds offers potential biotechnical applications. 
However, much of the knowledge of these organisms has not previously been 
codified in a machine-readable way using modern web standards.
RESULTS: The Porifera Ontology is intended as a standardized coding system for 
sponge anatomical features currently used in systematics. The ontology is 
available from http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/poro.owl, or from the project 
homepage http://porifera-ontology.googlecode.com/. The version referred to in 
this manuscript is permanently available from 
http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/poro/releases/2014-03-06/.
CONCLUSIONS: By standardizing character representations, we hope to facilitate 
more rapid description and identification of sponge taxa, to allow integration 
with other evolutionary database systems, and to perform character mapping 
across the major clades of sponges to better understand the evolution of 
morphological features. Future applications of the ontology will focus on 
creating (1) ontology-based species descriptions; (2) taxonomic keys that use 
the nested terms of the ontology to more quickly facilitate species 
identifications; and (3) methods to map anatomical characters onto molecular 
phylogenies of sponges. In addition to modern taxa, the ontology is being 
extended to include features of fossil taxa.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-39
PMCID: PMC4177528
PMID: 25276334