---
reference_id: PMID:26590256
title: "STITCH 5: augmenting protein-chemical interaction networks with tissue and affinity data."
authors:
- Szklarczyk D
- Santos A
- von Mering C
- Jensen LJ
- Bork P
- Kuhn M
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1277
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Pharmaceutical"
- Drug Discovery
- Humans
- Organ Specificity
- Protein Binding
- "Proteins/drug effects, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STITCH 5: augmenting protein-chemical interaction networks with tissue and affinity data.
**Authors:** Szklarczyk D, Santos A, von Mering C, Jensen LJ, Bork P, Kuhn M
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkv1277](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1277)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 4;44(D1):D380-4. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1277. Epub
2015  Nov 20.

STITCH 5: augmenting protein-chemical interaction networks with tissue and 
affinity data.

Szklarczyk D(1), Santos A(2), von Mering C(1), Jensen LJ(2), Bork P(3), Kuhn 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich and Swiss 
Institute of Bioinformatics, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology 
Unit, Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, 
Germany Max-Delbrück-Centre for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 
13092 Berlin, Germany bork@embl.de.
(4)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 
Pfotenhauerstrasse 108, 01307 Dresden mkuhn@mpi-cbg.de.

Interactions between proteins and small molecules are an integral part of 
biological processes in living organisms. Information on these interactions is 
dispersed over many databases, texts and prediction methods, which makes it 
difficult to get a comprehensive overview of the available evidence. To address 
this, we have developed STITCH ('Search Tool for Interacting Chemicals') that 
integrates these disparate data sources for 430 000 chemicals into a single, 
easy-to-use resource. In addition to the increased scope of the database, we 
have implemented a new network view that gives the user the ability to view 
binding affinities of chemicals in the interaction network. This enables the 
user to get a quick overview of the potential effects of the chemical on its 
interaction partners. For each organism, STITCH provides a global network; 
however, not all proteins have the same pattern of spatial expression. 
Therefore, only a certain subset of interactions can occur simultaneously. In 
the new, fifth release of STITCH, we have implemented functionality to filter 
out the proteins and chemicals not associated with a given tissue. The STITCH 
database can be downloaded in full, accessed programmatically via an extensive 
API, or searched via a redesigned web interface at http://stitch.embl.de.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1277
PMCID: PMC4702904
PMID: 26590256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]