---
reference_id: PMID:10802651
title: "Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium."
authors:
- Ashburner M
- Ball CA
- Blake JA
- Botstein D
- Butler H
- Cherry JM
- Davis AP
- Dolinski K
- Dwight SS
- Eppig JT
- Harris MA
- Hill DP
- Issel-Tarver L
- Kasarskis A
- Lewis S
- Matese JC
- Richardson JE
- Ringwald M
- Rubin GM
- Sherlock G
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/75556
keywords:
- Animals
- Computer Communication Networks
- "Databases, Factual"
- Eukaryotic Cells/physiology
- Genes
- Humans
- Metaphysics
- Mice
- Molecular Biology/trends
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium.
**Authors:** Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/75556](https://doi.org/10.1038/75556)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 May;25(1):25-9. doi: 10.1038/75556.

Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology 
Consortium.

Ashburner M(1), Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP, 
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis 
A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, California, 
USA. cherry@stanford.edu

Genomic sequencing has made it clear that a large fraction of the genes 
specifying the core biological functions are shared by all eukaryotes. Knowledge 
of the biological role of such shared proteins in one organism can often be 
transferred to other organisms. The goal of the Gene Ontology Consortium is to 
produce a dynamic, controlled vocabulary that can be applied to all eukaryotes 
even as knowledge of gene and protein roles in cells is accumulating and 
changing. To this end, three independent ontologies accessible on the World-Wide 
Web (http://www.geneontology.org) are being constructed: biological process, 
molecular function and cellular component.

DOI: 10.1038/75556
PMCID: PMC3037419
PMID: 10802651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]