---
reference_id: PMID:27862469
title: "Araport11: a complete reannotation of the Arabidopsis thaliana reference genome."
authors:
- Cheng CY
- Krishnakumar V
- Chan AP
- Thibaud-Nissen F
- Schobel S
- Town CD
journal: Plant J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/tpj.13415
keywords:
- Arabidopsis/genetics
- Arabidopsis Proteins/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Plant/genetics"
- "Genome, Plant/genetics"
- "RNA, Plant/genetics"
- Transcriptome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Araport11: a complete reannotation of the Arabidopsis thaliana reference genome.
**Authors:** Cheng CY, Krishnakumar V, Chan AP, Thibaud-Nissen F, Schobel S, Town CD
**Journal:** Plant J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tpj.13415](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13415)

## Content

1. Plant J. 2017 Feb;89(4):789-804. doi: 10.1111/tpj.13415. Epub 2017 Feb 10.

Araport11: a complete reannotation of the Arabidopsis thaliana reference genome.

Cheng CY(1), Krishnakumar V(1), Chan AP(1), Thibaud-Nissen F(2), Schobel S(1), 
Town CD(1).

Author information:
(1)J. Craig Venter Institute, 9714 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD, 20850, 
USA.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information, US National Library of 
Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20894, USA.

The flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a dicot model organism for research 
in many aspects of plant biology. A comprehensive annotation of its genome paves 
the way for understanding the functions and activities of all types of 
transcripts, including mRNA, the various classes of non-coding RNA, and small 
RNA. The TAIR10 annotation update had a profound impact on Arabidopsis research 
but was released more than 5 years ago. Maintaining the accuracy of the 
annotation continues to be a prerequisite for future progress. Using an 
integrative annotation pipeline, we assembled tissue-specific RNA-Seq libraries 
from 113 datasets and constructed 48 359 transcript models of protein-coding 
genes in eleven tissues. In addition, we annotated various classes of non-coding 
RNA including microRNA, long intergenic RNA, small nucleolar RNA, natural 
antisense transcript, small nuclear RNA, and small RNA using published datasets 
and in-house analytic results. Altogether, we identified 635 novel 
protein-coding genes, 508 novel transcribed regions, 5178 non-coding RNAs, and 
35 846 small RNA loci that were formerly unannotated. Analysis of the splicing 
events and RNA-Seq based expression profiles revealed the landscapes of gene 
structures, untranslated regions, and splicing activities to be more intricate 
than previously appreciated. Furthermore, we present 692 uniformly expressed 
housekeeping genes, 43% of whose human orthologs are also housekeeping genes. 
This updated Arabidopsis genome annotation with a substantially increased 
resolution of gene models will not only further our understanding of the 
biological processes of this plant model but also of other species.

© 2016 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.13415
PMID: 27862469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]