---
reference_id: PMID:34275487
title: The Infectious Disease Ontology in the age of COVID-19.
authors:
- Babcock S
- Beverley J
- Cowell LG
- Smith B
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-021-00245-1
keywords:
- "Biological Ontologies/statistics & numerical data"
- "COVID-19/epidemiology, prevention & control, virology"
- "Communicable Disease Control/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "Communicable Diseases/epidemiology, therapy, transmission"
- "Computational Biology/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "Data Mining/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- Epidemics
- Humans
- Information Dissemination/methods
- "Public Health/methods, statistics & numerical data"
- "SARS-CoV-2/isolation & purification, physiology"
- Semantics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Infectious Disease Ontology in the age of COVID-19.
**Authors:** Babcock S, Beverley J, Cowell LG, Smith B
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-021-00245-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-021-00245-1)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2021 Jul 18;12(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s13326-021-00245-1.

The Infectious Disease Ontology in the age of COVID-19.

Babcock S(1)(2), Beverley J(3)(4), Cowell LG(3)(5), Smith B(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Philosophy, Niagara University, Lewiston, NY, USA. 
sbabcock@niagara.edu.
(2)National Center for Ontological Research, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 
USA. sbabcock@niagara.edu.
(3)National Center for Ontological Research, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 
USA.
(4)Department of Philosophy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
(5)Cowell Lab, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Philosophy, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Effective response to public health emergencies, such as we are now 
experiencing with COVID-19, requires data sharing across multiple disciplines 
and data systems. Ontologies offer a powerful data sharing tool, and this holds 
especially for those ontologies built on the design principles of the Open 
Biomedical Ontologies Foundry. These principles are exemplified by the 
Infectious Disease Ontology (IDO), a suite of interoperable ontology modules 
aiming to provide coverage of all aspects of the infectious disease domain. At 
its center is IDO Core, a disease- and pathogen-neutral ontology covering just 
those types of entities and relations that are relevant to infectious diseases 
generally. IDO Core is extended by disease and pathogen-specific ontology 
modules.
RESULTS: To assist the integration and analysis of COVID-19 data, and viral 
infectious disease data more generally, we have recently developed three new IDO 
extensions: IDO Virus (VIDO); the Coronavirus Infectious Disease Ontology 
(CIDO); and an extension of CIDO focusing on COVID-19 (IDO-COVID-19). Reflecting 
the fact that viruses lack cellular parts, we have introduced into IDO Core the 
term acellular structure to cover viruses and other acellular entities studied 
by virologists. We now distinguish between infectious agents - organisms with an 
infectious disposition - and infectious structures - acellular structures with 
an infectious disposition. This in turn has led to various updates and 
refinements of IDO Core's content. We believe that our work on VIDO, CIDO, and 
IDO-COVID-19 can serve as a model for yielding greater conformance with ontology 
building best practices.
CONCLUSIONS: IDO provides a simple recipe for building new pathogen-specific 
ontologies in a way that allows data about novel diseases to be easily compared, 
along multiple dimensions, with data represented by existing disease ontologies. 
The IDO strategy, moreover, supports ontology coordination, providing a powerful 
method of data integration and sharing that allows physicians, researchers, and 
public health organizations to respond rapidly and efficiently to current and 
future public health crises.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-021-00245-1
PMCID: PMC8286442
PMID: 34275487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.