---
reference_id: PMID:32761142
title: "NCBI Taxonomy: a comprehensive update on curation, resources and tools."
authors:
- Schoch CL
- Ciufo S
- Domrachev M
- Hotton CL
- Kannan S
- Khovanskaya R
- Leipe D
- Mcveigh R
- "O'Neill K"
- Robbertse B
- Sharma S
- Soussov V
- Sullivan JP
- Sun L
- Turner S
- Karsch-Mizrachi I
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/database/baaa062
keywords:
- Animals
- Bacteria/genetics
- Classification
- Database Management Systems
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Humans
- National Library of Medicine (U.S.)
- Plants/genetics
- United States
- Viruses/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NCBI Taxonomy: a comprehensive update on curation, resources and tools.
**Authors:** Schoch CL, Ciufo S, Domrachev M, Hotton CL, Kannan S, Khovanskaya R, Leipe D, Mcveigh R, O'Neill K, Robbertse B, Sharma S, Soussov V, Sullivan JP, Sun L, Turner S, Karsch-Mizrachi I
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/baaa062](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/baaa062)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2020 Jan 1;2020:baaa062. doi: 10.1093/database/baaa062.

NCBI Taxonomy: a comprehensive update on curation, resources and tools.

Schoch CL(1), Ciufo S(1), Domrachev M(1), Hotton CL(1), Kannan S(1), Khovanskaya 
R(1), Leipe D(1), Mcveigh R(1), O'Neill K(1), Robbertse B(1), Sharma S(1), 
Soussov V(1), Sullivan JP(1), Sun L(1), Turner S(1), Karsch-Mizrachi I(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center of Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, 9600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Taxonomy includes 
organism names and classifications for every sequence in the nucleotide and 
protein sequence databases of the International Nucleotide Sequence Database 
Collaboration. Since the last review of this resource in 2012, it has undergone 
several improvements. Most notable is the shift from a single SQL database to a 
series of linked databases tied to a framework of data called NameBank. This 
means that relations among data elements can be adjusted in more detail, 
resulting in expanded annotation of synonyms, the ability to flag names with 
specific nomenclatural properties, enhanced tracking of publications tied to 
names and improved annotation of scientific authorities and types. Additionally, 
practices utilized by NCBI Taxonomy curators specific to major taxonomic groups 
are described, terms peculiar to NCBI Taxonomy are explained, external resources 
are acknowledged and updates to tools and other resources are documented. 
Database URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy.

Published by Oxford University Press 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baaa062
PMCID: PMC7408187
PMID: 32761142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]