---
reference_id: PMID:27377652
title: "The Cell Ontology 2016: enhanced content, modularization, and ontology interoperability."
authors:
- Diehl AD
- Meehan TF
- Bradford YM
- Brush MH
- Dahdul WM
- Dougall DS
- He Y
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Ruttenberg A
- Sarntivijai S
- Van Slyke CE
- Vasilevsky NA
- Haendel MA
- Blake JA
- Mungall CJ
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Cells
- Natural Language Processing
- Nervous System/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cell Ontology 2016: enhanced content, modularization, and ontology interoperability.
**Authors:** Diehl AD, Meehan TF, Bradford YM, Brush MH, Dahdul WM, Dougall DS, He Y, Osumi-Sutherland D, Ruttenberg A, Sarntivijai S, Van Slyke CE, Vasilevsky NA, Haendel MA, Blake JA, Mungall CJ
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Jul 4;7(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7.

The Cell Ontology 2016: enhanced content, modularization, and ontology 
interoperability.

Diehl AD(1), Meehan TF(2), Bradford YM(3), Brush MH(4), Dahdul WM(5)(6), Dougall 
DS(7), He Y(8), Osumi-Sutherland D(2), Ruttenberg A(9), Sarntivijai S(2), Van 
Slyke CE(3), Vasilevsky NA(4), Haendel MA(4), Blake JA(10), Mungall CJ(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University at Buffalo School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, NY, 14203, USA. addiehl@buffalo.edu.
(2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK.
(3)ZFIN, the Zebrafish Model Organism Database, 5291 University of Oregon, 
Eugene, OR, 97403, USA.
(4)Ontology Development Group, Library, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, Oregon, 97239, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD, 57069, 
USA.
(6)National Evolutionary Synthesis Center, Durham, NC, 27705, USA.
(7)Southwestern Medical Center, University of Texas, Dallas, TX, 75235, USA.
(8)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(9)Oral Diagnostics Sciences, University at Buffalo School of Dental Medicine, 
Buffalo, NY, 14210, USA.
(10)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, 04609, USA.
(11)Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, 
94720, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Cell Ontology (CL) is an OBO Foundry candidate ontology covering 
the domain of canonical, natural biological cell types. Since its inception in 
2005, the CL has undergone multiple rounds of revision and expansion, most 
notably in its representation of hematopoietic cells. For in vivo cells, the CL 
focuses on vertebrates but provides general classes that can be used for other 
metazoans, which can be subtyped in species-specific ontologies.
CONSTRUCTION AND CONTENT: Recent work on the CL has focused on extending the 
representation of various cell types, and developing new modules in the CL 
itself, and in related ontologies in coordination with the CL. For example, the 
Kidney and Urinary Pathway Ontology was used as a template to populate the CL 
with additional cell types. In addition, subtypes of the class 'cell in vitro' 
have received improved definitions and labels to provide for modularity with the 
representation of cells in the Cell Line Ontology and Reagent Ontology. Recent 
changes in the ontology development methodology for CL include a switch from OBO 
to OWL for the primary encoding of the ontology, and an increasing reliance on 
logical definitions for improved reasoning.
UTILITY AND DISCUSSION: The CL is now mandated as a metadata standard for large 
functional genomics and transcriptomics projects, and is used extensively for 
annotation, querying, and analyses of cell type specific data in sequencing 
consortia such as FANTOM5 and ENCODE, as well as for the NIAID ImmPort database 
and the Cell Image Library. The CL is also a vital component used in the modular 
construction of other biomedical ontologies-for example, the Gene Ontology and 
the cross-species anatomy ontology, Uberon, use CL to support the consistent 
representation of cell types across different levels of anatomical granularity, 
such as tissues and organs.
CONCLUSIONS: The ongoing improvements to the CL make it a valuable resource to 
both the OBO Foundry community and the wider scientific community, and we 
continue to experience increased interest in the CL both among developers and 
within the user community.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0088-7
PMCID: PMC4932724
PMID: 27377652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]