---
reference_id: PMID:36350656
title: "The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog: knowledgebase and deposition resource."
authors:
- Sollis E
- Mosaku A
- Abid A
- Buniello A
- Cerezo M
- Gil L
- Groza T
- Güneş O
- Hall P
- Hayhurst J
- Ibrahim A
- Ji Y
- John S
- Lewis E
- MacArthur JAL
- McMahon A
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Panoutsopoulou K
- Pendlington Z
- Ramachandran S
- Stefancsik R
- Stewart J
- Whetzel P
- Wilson R
- Hindorff L
- Cunningham F
- Lambert SA
- Inouye M
- Parkinson H
- Harris LW
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1010
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- National Human Genome Research Institute (U.S.)
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Software
- United States
- Knowledge Bases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog: knowledgebase and deposition resource.
**Authors:** Sollis E, Mosaku A, Abid A, Buniello A, Cerezo M, Gil L, Groza T, Güneş O, Hall P, Hayhurst J, Ibrahim A, Ji Y, John S, Lewis E, MacArthur JAL, McMahon A, Osumi-Sutherland D, Panoutsopoulou K, Pendlington Z, Ramachandran S, Stefancsik R, Stewart J, Whetzel P, Wilson R, Hindorff L, Cunningham F, Lambert SA, Inouye M, Parkinson H, Harris LW
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac1010](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac1010)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D977-D985. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1010.

The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog: knowledgebase and deposition resource.

Sollis E(1), Mosaku A(1), Abid A(1), Buniello A(2), Cerezo M(1), Gil L(3)(4), 
Groza T(1), Güneş O(1), Hall P(5), Hayhurst J(1), Ibrahim A(1), Ji Y(1), John 
S(1), Lewis E(1), MacArthur JAL(1), McMahon A(1), Osumi-Sutherland D(1), 
Panoutsopoulou K(1), Pendlington Z(1), Ramachandran S(1), Stefancsik R(1), 
Stewart J(1), Whetzel P(1), Wilson R(1), Hindorff L(5), Cunningham F(1), Lambert 
SA(1)(6)(7)(4), Inouye M(6)(7)(4)(8), Parkinson H(1), Harris LW(1).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.
(2)Open Targets, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.
(3)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 
1SA, UK.
(4)Health Data Research UK Cambridge, Wellcome Genome Campus and University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Division of Genomic Medicine, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Cambridge Baker Systems Genomics Initiative, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(7)British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of 
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Cambridge Baker Systems Genomics Initiative, Baker Heart and Diabetes 
Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog (www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas) is a FAIR knowledgebase 
providing detailed, structured, standardised and interoperable genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) data to >200 000 users per year from academic research, 
healthcare and industry. The Catalog contains variant-trait associations and 
supporting metadata for >45 000 published GWAS across >5000 human traits, 
and >40 000 full P-value summary statistics datasets. Content is curated from 
publications or acquired via author submission of prepublication summary 
statistics through a new submission portal and validation tool. GWAS data volume 
has vastly increased in recent years. We have updated our software to meet this 
scaling challenge and to enable rapid release of submitted summary statistics. 
The scope of the repository has expanded to include additional data types of 
high interest to the community, including sequencing-based GWAS, gene-based 
analyses and copy number variation analyses. Community outreach has increased 
the number of shared datasets from under-represented traits, e.g. cancer, and we 
continue to contribute to awareness of the lack of population diversity in GWAS. 
Interoperability of the Catalog has been enhanced through links to other 
resources including the Polygenic Score Catalog and the International Mouse 
Phenotyping Consortium, refinements to GWAS trait annotation, and the 
development of a standard format for GWAS data.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac1010
PMCID: PMC9825413
PMID: 36350656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]