---
reference_id: PMID:22027554
title: Controlled vocabularies and semantics in systems biology.
authors:
- Courtot M
- Juty N
- Knüpfer C
- Waltemath D
- Zhukova A
- Dräger A
- Dumontier M
- Finney A
- Golebiewski M
- Hastings J
- Hoops S
- Keating S
- Kell DB
- Kerrien S
- Lawson J
- Lister A
- Lu J
- Machne R
- Mendes P
- Pocock M
- Rodriguez N
- Villeger A
- Wilkinson DJ
- Wimalaratne S
- Laibe C
- Hucka M
- Le Novère N
journal: Mol Syst Biol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/msb.2011.77
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Computational Biology
- Computer Simulation
- Information Storage and Retrieval
- "Models, Biological"
- Semantics
- Systems Biology
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Controlled vocabularies and semantics in systems biology.
**Authors:** Courtot M, Juty N, Knüpfer C, Waltemath D, Zhukova A, Dräger A, Dumontier M, Finney A, Golebiewski M, Hastings J, Hoops S, Keating S, Kell DB, Kerrien S, Lawson J, Lister A, Lu J, Machne R, Mendes P, Pocock M, Rodriguez N, Villeger A, Wilkinson DJ, Wimalaratne S, Laibe C, Hucka M, Le Novère N
**Journal:** Mol Syst Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/msb.2011.77](https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2011.77)

## Content

1. Mol Syst Biol. 2011 Oct 25;7:543. doi: 10.1038/msb.2011.77.

Controlled vocabularies and semantics in systems biology.

Courtot M(1), Juty N, Knüpfer C, Waltemath D, Zhukova A, Dräger A, Dumontier M, 
Finney A, Golebiewski M, Hastings J, Hoops S, Keating S, Kell DB, Kerrien S, 
Lawson J, Lister A, Lu J, Machne R, Mendes P, Pocock M, Rodriguez N, Villeger A, 
Wilkinson DJ, Wimalaratne S, Laibe C, Hucka M, Le Novère N.

Author information:
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, Vancouver, Canada.

The use of computational modeling to describe and analyze biological systems is 
at the heart of systems biology. Model structures, simulation descriptions and 
numerical results can be encoded in structured formats, but there is an 
increasing need to provide an additional semantic layer. Semantic information 
adds meaning to components of structured descriptions to help identify and 
interpret them unambiguously. Ontologies are one of the tools frequently used 
for this purpose. We describe here three ontologies created specifically to 
address the needs of the systems biology community. The Systems Biology Ontology 
(SBO) provides semantic information about the model components. The Kinetic 
Simulation Algorithm Ontology (KiSAO) supplies information about existing 
algorithms available for the simulation of systems biology models, their 
characterization and interrelationships. The Terminology for the Description of 
Dynamics (TEDDY) categorizes dynamical features of the simulation results and 
general systems behavior. The provision of semantic information extends a 
model's longevity and facilitates its reuse. It provides useful insight into the 
biology of modeled processes, and may be used to make informed decisions on 
subsequent simulation experiments.

DOI: 10.1038/msb.2011.77
PMCID: PMC3261705
PMID: 22027554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.