---
reference_id: PMID:37094905
title: "Formalizing Invertebrate Morphological Data: A Descriptive Model for Cuticle-Based Skeleto-Muscular Systems, an Ontology for Insect Anatomy, and their Potential Applications in Biodiversity Research and Informatics."
authors:
- Girón JC
- Tarasov S
- González Montaña LA
- Matentzoglu N
- Smith AD
- Koch M
- Boudinot BE
- Bouchard P
- Burks R
- Vogt L
- Yoder M
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Friedrich F
- Beutel RG
- Mikó I
journal: Syst Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syad025
keywords:
- Animals
- Phylogeny
- Arthropods
- Insecta
- Informatics
- Biodiversity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Formalizing Invertebrate Morphological Data: A Descriptive Model for Cuticle-Based Skeleto-Muscular Systems, an Ontology for Insect Anatomy, and their Potential Applications in Biodiversity Research and Informatics.
**Authors:** Girón JC, Tarasov S, González Montaña LA, Matentzoglu N, Smith AD, Koch M, Boudinot BE, Bouchard P, Burks R, Vogt L, Yoder M, Osumi-Sutherland D, Friedrich F, Beutel RG, Mikó I
**Journal:** Syst Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/sysbio/syad025](https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syad025)

## Content

1. Syst Biol. 2023 Nov 1;72(5):1084-1100. doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syad025.

Formalizing Invertebrate Morphological Data: A Descriptive Model for 
Cuticle-Based Skeleto-Muscular Systems, an Ontology for Insect Anatomy, and 
their Potential Applications in Biodiversity Research and Informatics.

Girón JC(1)(2), Tarasov S(3), González Montaña LA(4), Matentzoglu N(5), Smith 
AD(1), Koch M(6), Boudinot BE(7)(8)(9), Bouchard P(10), Burks R(11), Vogt L(12), 
Yoder M(13), Osumi-Sutherland D(14), Friedrich F(15), Beutel RG(8), Mikó I(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
(2)Natural Science Research Laboratory, Museum of Texas Tech University, 
Lubbock, TX, USA.
(3)Finnish Museum of Natural History, University of Helsinki, Pohjoinen 
Rautatiekatu 13, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Facultad de Ciencias Básicas e Ingeniería, Universidad de los Llanos, 
Villavicencio, Meta, Colombia.
(5)Semanticly Ltd., London, UK.
(6)Institute of Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, University of Bonn, An der 
Immenburg 1, 53121 Bonn, Germany.
(7)Department of Entomology & Nematology, University of California, Davis, One 
Shields Ave, CA, USA.
(8)Institut für Zoologie und Evolutionsforschung, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität 
Jena, Erbertstraße 1, 07743 Jena, Germany.
(9)Department of Entomology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington DC, USA.
(10)Biodiversity and Bioresources, Canadian National Collection of Insects, 
Arachnids and Nematodes, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 960 Carling Avenue, 
Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0C6, Canada.
(11)Entomology Department, University of California, Riverside, 900 University 
Ave. Riverside, CA, USA.
(12)TIB Leibniz Information Centre for Science and Technology, Welfengarten 1B, 
30167 Hannover, Germany.
(13)Illinois Natural History Survey, University of Illinois, Champaign, IL, USA.
(14)European Bioinformatics institute (EMBL-EBI) WellcomeTrust Genome Campus, 
CambridgeUK.
(15)Institut für Zell- und Systembiologie der Tiere, Universität Hamburg, 
Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, 20146, Hamburg, Germany.
(16)Department of Biological Sciences, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, 
USA.

The spectacular radiation of insects has produced a stunning diversity of 
phenotypes. During the past 250 years, research on insect systematics has 
generated hundreds of terms for naming and comparing them. In its current form, 
this terminological diversity is presented in natural language and lacks 
formalization, which prohibits computer-assisted comparison using semantic web 
technologies. Here we propose a Model for Describing Cuticular Anatomical 
Structures (MoDCAS) which incorporates structural properties and positional 
relationships for standardized, consistent, and reproducible descriptions of 
arthropod phenotypes. We applied the MoDCAS framework in creating the ontology 
for the Anatomy of the Insect Skeleto-Muscular system (AISM). The AISM is the 
first general insect ontology that aims to cover all taxa by providing 
generalized, fully logical, and queryable, definitions for each term. It was 
built using the Ontology Development Kit (ODK), which maximizes interoperability 
with Uberon (Uberon multispecies anatomy ontology) and other basic ontologies, 
enhancing the integration of insect anatomy into the broader biological 
sciences. A template system for adding new terms, extending, and linking the 
AISM to additional anatomical, phenotypic, genetic, and chemical ontologies is 
also introduced. The AISM is proposed as the backbone for taxon-specific insect 
ontologies and has potential applications spanning systematic biology and 
biodiversity informatics, allowing users to: 1) use controlled vocabularies and 
create semiautomated computer-parsable insect morphological descriptions; 2) 
integrate insect morphology into broader fields of research, including 
ontology-informed phylogenetic methods, logical homology hypothesis testing, 
evo-devo studies, and genotype to phenotype mapping; and 3) automate the 
extraction of morphological data from the literature, enabling the generation of 
large-scale phenomic data, by facilitating the production and testing of 
informatic tools able to extract, link, annotate, and process morphological 
data. This descriptive model and its ontological applications will allow for 
clear and semantically interoperable integration of arthropod phenotypes in 
biodiversity studies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press, on behalf of the 
Society of Systematic Biologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/sysbio/syad025
PMID: 37094905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]