---
reference_id: PMID:31740966
title: 'EnhancerAtlas 2.0: an updated resource with enhancer annotation in 586 tissue/cell
  types across nine species.'
authors:
- Gao T
- Qian J
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz980
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EnhancerAtlas 2.0: an updated resource with enhancer annotation in 586 tissue/cell types across nine species.
**Authors:** Gao T, Qian J
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkz980](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz980)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Jan 8;48(D1):D58-D64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz980.

EnhancerAtlas 2.0: an updated resource with enhancer annotation in 586
tissue/cell types across nine species.

Gao T(1), Qian J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA.
(2)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Enhancers are distal cis-regulatory elements that activate the transcription of
their target genes. They regulate a wide range of important biological functions
and processes, including embryogenesis, development, and homeostasis. As more
and more large-scale technologies were developed for enhancer identification, a
comprehensive database is highly desirable for enhancer annotation based on
various genome-wide profiling datasets across different species. Here, we
present an updated database EnhancerAtlas 2.0
(http://www.enhanceratlas.org/indexv2.php), covering 586 tissue/cell types that
include a large number of normal tissues, cancer cell lines, and cells at
different development stages across nine species. Overall, the database contains
13 494 603 enhancers, which were obtained from 16 055 datasets using 12
high-throughput experiment methods (e.g. H3K4me1/H3K27ac, DNase-seq/ATAC-seq,
P300, POLR2A, CAGE, ChIA-PET, GRO-seq, STARR-seq and MPRA). The updated version
is a huge expansion of the first version, which only contains the enhancers in
human cells. In addition, we predicted enhancer-target gene relationships in
human, mouse and fly. Finally, the users can search enhancers and
enhancer-target gene relationships through five user-friendly, interactive
modules. We believe the new annotation of enhancers in EnhancerAtlas 2.0 will
facilitate users to perform useful functional analysis of enhancers in various
genomes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz980
PMCID: PMC7145677
PMID: 31740966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
