---
reference_id: PMID:20547776
title: "The teleost anatomy ontology: anatomical representation for the genomics age."
authors:
- Dahdul WM
- Lundberg JG
- Midford PE
- Balhoff JP
- Lapp H
- Vision TJ
- Haendel MA
- Westerfield M
- Mabee PM
journal: Syst Biol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syq013
keywords:
- Animals
- Biological Evolution
- Classification
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Fishes/anatomy & histology, genetics"
- Genomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The teleost anatomy ontology: anatomical representation for the genomics age.
**Authors:** Dahdul WM, Lundberg JG, Midford PE, Balhoff JP, Lapp H, Vision TJ, Haendel MA, Westerfield M, Mabee PM
**Journal:** Syst Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/sysbio/syq013](https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syq013)

## Content

1. Syst Biol. 2010 Jul;59(4):369-83. doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syq013. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

The teleost anatomy ontology: anatomical representation for the genomics age.

Dahdul WM(1), Lundberg JG, Midford PE, Balhoff JP, Lapp H, Vision TJ, Haendel 
MA, Westerfield M, Mabee PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD 57069, USA. 
wasila.dahdul@usd.edu

The rich knowledge of morphological variation among organisms reported in the 
systematic literature has remained in free-text format, impractical for use in 
large-scale synthetic phylogenetic work. This noncomputable format has also 
precluded linkage to the large knowledgebase of genomic, genetic, developmental, 
and phenotype data in model organism databases. We have undertaken an effort to 
prototype a curated, ontology-based evolutionary morphology database that maps 
to these genetic databases (http://kb.phenoscape.org) to facilitate 
investigation into the mechanistic basis and evolution of phenotypic diversity. 
Among the first requirements in establishing this database was the development 
of a multispecies anatomy ontology with the goal of capturing anatomical data in 
a systematic and computable manner. An ontology is a formal representation of a 
set of concepts with defined relationships between those concepts. Multispecies 
anatomy ontologies in particular are an efficient way to represent the diversity 
of morphological structures in a clade of organisms, but they present challenges 
in their development relative to single-species anatomy ontologies. Here, we 
describe the Teleost Anatomy Ontology (TAO), a multispecies anatomy ontology for 
teleost fishes derived from the Zebrafish Anatomical Ontology (ZFA) for the 
purpose of annotating varying morphological features across species. To 
facilitate interoperability with other anatomy ontologies, TAO uses the Common 
Anatomy Reference Ontology as a template for its upper level nodes, and TAO and 
ZFA are synchronized, with zebrafish terms specified as subtypes of teleost 
terms. We found that the details of ontology architecture have ramifications for 
querying, and we present general challenges in developing a multispecies anatomy 
ontology, including refinement of definitions, taxon-specific relationships 
among terms, and representation of taxonomically variable developmental 
pathways.

DOI: 10.1093/sysbio/syq013
PMCID: PMC2885267
PMID: 20547776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]