---
reference_id: PMID:14681409
title: "The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology."
authors:
- Bodenreider O
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh061
keywords:
- Animals
- Biomedical Research
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval
- Internet
- Licensure
- Molecular Biology
- National Library of Medicine (U.S.)
- "Neurofibromatosis 2/genetics, metabolism"
- Software
- Subject Headings
- Terminology as Topic
- Unified Medical Language System
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology.
**Authors:** Bodenreider O
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkh061](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh061)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 1;32(Database issue):D267-70. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkh061.

The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology.

Bodenreider O(1).

Author information:
(1)Lister Hill Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library of 
Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Building 38A, 8600 Rockville Pike, 
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. olivier@nlm.nih.gov

The Unified Medical Language System (http://umlsks.nlm.nih.gov) is a repository 
of biomedical vocabularies developed by the US National Library of Medicine. The 
UMLS integrates over 2 million names for some 900,000 concepts from more than 60 
families of biomedical vocabularies, as well as 12 million relations among these 
concepts. Vocabularies integrated in the UMLS Metathesaurus include the NCBI 
taxonomy, Gene Ontology, the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), OMIM and the 
Digital Anatomist Symbolic Knowledge Base. UMLS concepts are not only 
inter-related, but may also be linked to external resources such as GenBank. In 
addition to data, the UMLS includes tools for customizing the Metathesaurus 
(MetamorphoSys), for generating lexical variants of concept names (lvg) and for 
extracting UMLS concepts from text (MetaMap). The UMLS knowledge sources are 
updated quarterly. All vocabularies are available at no fee for research 
purposes within an institution, but UMLS users are required to sign a license 
agreement. The UMLS knowledge sources are distributed on CD-ROM and by FTP.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh061
PMCID: PMC308795
PMID: 14681409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]