---
reference_id: PMID:26147071
title: "DINTO: Using OWL Ontologies and SWRL Rules to Infer Drug-Drug Interactions and Their Mechanisms."
authors:
- Herrero-Zazo M
- Segura-Bedmar I
- Hastings J
- Martínez P
journal: J Chem Inf Model
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00119
keywords:
- "Databases, Pharmaceutical"
- Drug Interactions
- Humans
- Internet
- Semantics
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DINTO: Using OWL Ontologies and SWRL Rules to Infer Drug-Drug Interactions and Their Mechanisms.
**Authors:** Herrero-Zazo M, Segura-Bedmar I, Hastings J, Martínez P
**Journal:** J Chem Inf Model (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00119](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00119)

## Content

1. J Chem Inf Model. 2015 Aug 24;55(8):1698-707. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00119. 
Epub 2015 Aug 5.

DINTO: Using OWL Ontologies and SWRL Rules to Infer Drug-Drug Interactions and 
Their Mechanisms.

Herrero-Zazo M(1), Segura-Bedmar I(1), Hastings J(2), Martínez P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid , Leganés 
28911, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Cheminformatics and Metabolism, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) 
, Hinxton, CB10 1SD, U.K.

The early detection of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) is limited by the diffuse 
spread of DDI information in heterogeneous sources. Computational methods 
promise to play a key role in the identification and explanation of DDIs on a 
large scale. However, such methods rely on the availability of computable 
representations describing the relevant domain knowledge. Current modeling 
efforts have focused on partial and shallow representations of the DDI domain, 
failing to adequately support computational inference and discovery 
applications. In this paper, we describe a comprehensive ontology for DDI 
knowledge (DINTO), which is the first formal representation of different types 
of DDIs and their mechanisms and its application in the prediction of DDIs. This 
project has been developed using currently available semantic web technologies, 
standards, and tools, and we have demonstrated that the combination of 
drug-related facts in DINTO and Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) rules can be 
used to infer DDIs and their different mechanisms on a large scale. The ontology 
is available from https://code.google.com/p/dinto/.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00119
PMID: 26147071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]