---
reference_id: PMID:24568621
title: "The zebrafish anatomy and stage ontologies: representing the anatomy and development of Danio rerio."
authors:
- Van Slyke CE
- Bradford YM
- Westerfield M
- Haendel MA
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-12
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The zebrafish anatomy and stage ontologies: representing the anatomy and development of Danio rerio.
**Authors:** Van Slyke CE, Bradford YM, Westerfield M, Haendel MA
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-12](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-12)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Feb 25;5(1):12. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-12.

The zebrafish anatomy and stage ontologies: representing the anatomy and 
development of Danio rerio.

Van Slyke CE(1), Bradford YM, Westerfield M, Haendel MA.

Author information:
(1)ZFIN, 5291 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-5291, USA. 
van_slyke@zfin.org.

BACKGROUND: The Zebrafish Anatomy Ontology (ZFA) is an OBO Foundry ontology that 
is used in conjunction with the Zebrafish Stage Ontology (ZFS) to describe the 
gross and cellular anatomy and development of the zebrafish, Danio rerio, from 
single cell zygote to adult. The zebrafish model organism database (ZFIN) uses 
the ZFA and ZFS to annotate phenotype and gene expression data from the primary 
literature and from contributed data sets.
RESULTS: The ZFA models anatomy and development with a subclass hierarchy, a 
partonomy, and a developmental hierarchy and with relationships to the ZFS that 
define the stages during which each anatomical entity exists. The ZFA and ZFS 
are developed utilizing OBO Foundry principles to ensure orthogonality, 
accessibility, and interoperability. The ZFA has 2860 classes representing a 
diversity of anatomical structures from different anatomical systems and from 
different stages of development.
CONCLUSIONS: The ZFA describes zebrafish anatomy and development semantically 
for the purposes of annotating gene expression and anatomical phenotypes. The 
ontology and the data have been used by other resources to perform cross-species 
queries of gene expression and phenotype data, providing insights into genetic 
relationships, morphological evolution, and models of human disease.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-12
PMCID: PMC3944782
PMID: 24568621