---
reference_id: PMID:36624664
title: "NPASS database update 2023: quantitative natural product activity and species source database for biomedical research."
authors:
- Zhao H
- Yang Y
- Wang S
- Yang X
- Zhou K
- Xu C
- Zhang X
- Fan J
- Hou D
- Li X
- Lin H
- Tan Y
- Wang S
- Chu XY
- Zhuoma D
- Zhang F
- Ju D
- Zeng X
- Chen YZ
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1069
keywords:
- Biological Products
- Biomedical Research
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug Discovery
- "Pharmaceutical Preparations/isolation & purification"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NPASS database update 2023: quantitative natural product activity and species source database for biomedical research.
**Authors:** Zhao H, Yang Y, Wang S, Yang X, Zhou K, Xu C, Zhang X, Fan J, Hou D, Li X, Lin H, Tan Y, Wang S, Chu XY, Zhuoma D, Zhang F, Ju D, Zeng X, Chen YZ
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac1069](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac1069)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D621-D628. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1069.

NPASS database update 2023: quantitative natural product activity and species 
source database for biomedical research.

Zhao H(1), Yang Y(1), Wang S(1), Yang X(1), Zhou K(1), Xu C(1), Zhang X(1), Fan 
J(1), Hou D(1), Li X(1), Lin H(1), Tan Y(2), Wang S(3), Chu XY(3), Zhuoma D(4), 
Zhang F(5), Ju D(1), Zeng X(1), Chen YZ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Medicines & Shanghai Engineering Research Center of 
Immunotherapeutics, Fudan University School of Pharmacy, Shanghai 201203, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics & Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Biology, Tsinghua University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen Kivita 
Innovative Drug Discovery Institute, China.
(3)Qian Xuesen Collaborative Research Center of Astrochemistry and Space Life 
Sciences, Institute of Drug Discovery Technology, Ningbo University, 
Ningbo 315211, China.
(4)Medical College, Tibet University, Lhasa 850000, China.
(5)Key Lab of Agricultural Products Processing and Quality Control of Nanchang 
City, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045, China.
(6)Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China.

Quantitative activity and species source data of natural products (NPs) are 
important for drug discovery, medicinal plant research, and microbial 
investigations. Activity values of NPs against specific targets are useful for 
discovering targeted therapeutic agents and investigating the mechanism of 
medicinal plants. Composition/concentration values of NPs in individual species 
facilitate the assessments and investigations of the therapeutic quality of 
herbs and phenotypes of microbes. Here, we describe an update of the NPASS 
natural product activity and species source database previously featured in NAR. 
This update includes: (i) new data of ∼95 000 records of the 
composition/concentration values of ∼1 490 NPs/NP clusters in ∼390 species, (ii) 
extended data of activity values of ∼43 200 NPs against ∼7 700 targets (∼40% and 
∼32% increase, respectively), (iii) extended data of ∼31 600 species sources of 
∼94 400 NPs (∼26% and ∼32% increase, respectively), (iv) new species types of 
∼440 co-cultured microbes and ∼420 engineered microbes, (v) new data of ∼66 600 
NPs without experimental activity values but with estimated activity profiles 
from the established chemical similarity tool Chemical Checker, (vi) new data of 
the computed drug-likeness properties and the absorption, distribution, 
metabolism, excretion and toxicity (ADMET) properties for all NPs. NPASS update 
version is freely accessible at http://bidd.group/NPASS.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac1069
PMCID: PMC9825494
PMID: 36624664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]