---
reference_id: PMID:21515544
title: "Normalized names for clinical drugs: RxNorm at 6 years."
authors:
- Nelson SJ
- Zeng K
- Kilbourne J
- Powell T
- Moore R
journal: J Am Med Inform Assoc
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000116
keywords:
- "Decision Support Systems, Clinical"
- Drug Information Services
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval
- National Library of Medicine (U.S.)
- Pharmaceutical Preparations
- Terminology as Topic
- United States
- User-Computer Interface
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Normalized names for clinical drugs: RxNorm at 6 years.
**Authors:** Nelson SJ, Zeng K, Kilbourne J, Powell T, Moore R
**Journal:** J Am Med Inform Assoc (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000116](https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000116)

## Content

1. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2011 Jul-Aug;18(4):441-8. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000116. Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Normalized names for clinical drugs: RxNorm at 6 years.

Nelson SJ(1), Zeng K, Kilbourne J, Powell T, Moore R.

Author information:
(1)U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA. nelson@nlm.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: In the 6 years since the National Library of Medicine began monthly 
releases of RxNorm, RxNorm has become a central resource for communicating about 
clinical drugs and supporting interoperation between drug vocabularies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Built on the idea of a normalized name for a medication 
at a given level of abstraction, RxNorm provides a set of names and 
relationships based on 11 different external source vocabularies. The standard 
model enables decision support to take place for a variety of uses at the 
appropriate level of abstraction. With the incorporation of National Drug File 
Reference Terminology (NDF-RT) from the Veterans Administration, even more 
sophisticated decision support has become possible.
DISCUSSION: While related products such as RxTerms, RxNav, MyMedicationList, and 
MyRxPad have been recognized as helpful for various uses, tasks such as 
identifying exactly what is and is not on the market remain a challenge.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000116
PMCID: PMC3128404
PMID: 21515544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.