---
reference_id: PMID:35709356
title: "PLACES: Local Data for Better Health."
authors:
- Greenlund KJ
- Lu H
- Wang Y
- Matthews KA
- LeClercq JM
- Lee B
- Carlson SA
journal: Prev Chronic Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5888/pcd19.210459
keywords:
- "Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S."
- Health Equity
- Humans
- Public Health
- Rural Population
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PLACES: Local Data for Better Health.
**Authors:** Greenlund KJ, Lu H, Wang Y, Matthews KA, LeClercq JM, Lee B, Carlson SA
**Journal:** Prev Chronic Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5888/pcd19.210459](https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd19.210459)

## Content

1. Prev Chronic Dis. 2022 Jun 16;19:E31. doi: 10.5888/pcd19.210459.

PLACES: Local Data for Better Health.

Greenlund KJ(1), Lu H(2), Wang Y(2), Matthews KA(2), LeClercq JM(2), Lee B(3), 
Carlson SA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Population Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 4770 Buford 
Hwy NE, MS S107-6, Atlanta GA 30341. Email: Keg9@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Population Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention 
and Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 
Georgia.
(3)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Research Participation 
Program, Division of Population Health, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

Local-level data on the health of populations are important to inform and drive 
effective and efficient actions to improve health, but such data are often 
expensive to collect and thus rare. Population Level Analysis and Community 
EStimates (PLACES) (www.cdc.gov/places/), a collaboration between the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 
and the CDC Foundation, provides model-based estimates for 29 measures among all 
counties and most incorporated and census-designated places, census tracts, and 
ZIP Code tabulation areas across the US. PLACES allows local health departments 
and others to better understand the burden and geographic distribution of 
chronic disease-related outcomes in their areas regardless of population size 
and urban-rural status and assists them in planning public health interventions. 
Online resources allow users to visually explore health estimates 
geographically, compare estimates, and download data for further use and 
exploration. By understanding the PLACES overall approach and using the 
easy-to-use PLACES applications, practitioners, policy makers, and others can 
enhance their efforts to improve public health, including informing prevention 
activities, programs, and policies; identifying priority health risk behaviors 
for action; prioritizing investments to areas with the biggest gaps or 
inequities; and establishing key health objectives to achieve community health 
and health equity.

DOI: 10.5888/pcd19.210459
PMCID: PMC9258452
PMID: 35709356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]