---
reference_id: PMID:35267146
title: "The Neuron Phenotype Ontology: A FAIR Approach to Proposing and Classifying Neuronal Types."
authors:
- Gillespie TH
- Tripathy SJ
- Sy MF
- Martone ME
- Hill SL
journal: Neuroinformatics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12021-022-09566-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Interneurons
- Neurons
- Parvalbumins
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Neuron Phenotype Ontology: A FAIR Approach to Proposing and Classifying Neuronal Types.
**Authors:** Gillespie TH, Tripathy SJ, Sy MF, Martone ME, Hill SL
**Journal:** Neuroinformatics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12021-022-09566-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12021-022-09566-7)

## Content

1. Neuroinformatics. 2022 Jul;20(3):793-809. doi: 10.1007/s12021-022-09566-7.
Epub  2022 Mar 10.

The Neuron Phenotype Ontology: A FAIR Approach to Proposing and Classifying 
Neuronal Types.

Gillespie TH(1), Tripathy SJ(2)(3)(4), Sy MF(5), Martone ME(1), Hill 
SL(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Krembil Centre for Neuroinformatics, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Blue Brain Project, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Campus 
Biotech, 1202, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
sean.hill@epfl.ch.
(7)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
sean.hill@epfl.ch.
(8)Krembil Centre for Neuroinformatics, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
Toronto, ON, Canada. sean.hill@epfl.ch.
(9)Blue Brain Project, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Campus 
Biotech, 1202, Geneva, Switzerland. sean.hill@epfl.ch.

The challenge of defining and cataloging the building blocks of the brain 
requires a standardized approach to naming neurons and organizing knowledge 
about their properties. The US Brain Initiative Cell Census Network, Human Cell 
Atlas, Blue Brain Project, and others are generating vast amounts of data and 
characterizing large numbers of neurons throughout the nervous system. The 
neuroscientific literature contains many neuron names (e.g. parvalbumin-positive 
interneuron or layer 5 pyramidal cell) that are commonly used and generally 
accepted. However, it is often unclear how such common usage types relate to 
many evidence-based types that are proposed based on the results of new 
techniques. Further, comparing different types across labs remains a significant 
challenge. Here, we propose an interoperable knowledge representation, the 
Neuron Phenotype Ontology (NPO), that provides a standardized and automatable 
approach for naming cell types and normalizing their constituent phenotypes 
using identifiers from community ontologies as a common language. The NPO 
provides a framework for systematically organizing knowledge about cellular 
properties and enables interoperability with existing neuron naming schemes. We 
evaluate the NPO by populating a knowledge base with three independent cortical 
neuron classifications derived from published data sets that describe neurons 
according to molecular, morphological, electrophysiological, and synaptic 
properties. Competency queries to this knowledge base demonstrate that the NPO 
knowledge model enables interoperability between the three test cases and neuron 
names commonly used in the literature.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-022-09566-7
PMCID: PMC9547803
PMID: 35267146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]