---
reference_id: PMID:32548638
title: "Development of the Gender, Sex, and Sexual Orientation ontology: Evaluation and workflow."
authors:
- Kronk CA
- Dexheimer JW
journal: J Am Med Inform Assoc
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa061
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Female
- Gender Identity
- Humans
- Male
- Medical Subject Headings
- Sex
- Sexual Behavior/classification
- Sexual and Gender Minorities/classification
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of the Gender, Sex, and Sexual Orientation ontology: Evaluation and workflow.
**Authors:** Kronk CA, Dexheimer JW
**Journal:** J Am Med Inform Assoc (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jamia/ocaa061](https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocaa061)

## Content

1. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jul 1;27(7):1110-1115. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa061.

Development of the Gender, Sex, and Sexual Orientation ontology: Evaluation and 
workflow.

Kronk CA(1), Dexheimer JW(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Division of Emergency Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The study sought to create an integrated vocabulary system that 
addresses the lack of standardized health terminology in gender and sexual 
orientation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated computational efficiency, coverage, 
query-based term tagging, randomly selected term tagging, and mappings to 
existing terminology systems (including ICD (International Classification of 
Diseases), DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ), SNOMED 
(Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine), MeSH (Medical Subject Headings), and 
National Cancer Institute Thesaurus).
RESULTS: We published version 2 of the Gender, Sex, and Sexual Orientation 
(GSSO) ontology with over 10 000 entries with definitions, a readable hierarchy 
system, and over 14 000 database mappings. Over 70% of terms had no mapping in 
any other available ontology.
DISCUSSION: We created the GSSO and made it publicly available on the National 
Center for Biomedical Ontology BioPortal and on GitHub. It includes 
clarifications on over 200 slang terms, 190 pronouns with linked example usages, 
and over 200 nonbinary and culturally specific gender identities.
CONCLUSIONS: Gender and sexual orientation continue to represent crucial areas 
of medical practice and research with evolving terminology. The GSSO helps 
address this gap by providing a centralized data resource.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa061
PMCID: PMC7647319
PMID: 32548638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]