---
reference_id: PMID:23830913
title: "ADO: a disease ontology representing the domain knowledge specific to Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Malhotra A
- Younesi E
- Gündel M
- Müller B
- Heneka MT
- Hofmann-Apitius M
journal: Alzheimers Dement
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.009
keywords:
- Alzheimer Disease
- Computational Biology
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval
- "Models, Biological"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ADO: a disease ontology representing the domain knowledge specific to Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Malhotra A, Younesi E, Gündel M, Müller B, Heneka MT, Hofmann-Apitius M
**Journal:** Alzheimers Dement (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.009)

## Content

1. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Mar;10(2):238-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.009.
Epub  2013 Jul 3.

ADO: a disease ontology representing the domain knowledge specific to 
Alzheimer's disease.

Malhotra A(1), Younesi E(1), Gündel M(2), Müller B(2), Heneka MT(3), 
Hofmann-Apitius M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and 
Scientific Computing, Sankt Augustin, Germany; Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT, 
Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and 
Scientific Computing, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Clinical Neurosciences Unit, University of Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics, Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and 
Scientific Computing, Sankt Augustin, Germany; Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT, 
Bonn, Germany. Electronic address: martin.hofmann-apitius@scai.fraunhofer.de.

BACKGROUND: Biomedical ontologies offer the capability to structure and 
represent domain-specific knowledge semantically. Disease-specific ontologies 
can facilitate knowledge exchange across multiple disciplines, and 
ontology-driven mining approaches can generate great value for modeling disease 
mechanisms. However, in the case of neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's disease, there is a lack of formal representation of the relevant 
knowledge domain.
METHODS: Alzheimer's disease ontology (ADO) is constructed in accordance to the 
ontology building life cycle. The Protégé OWL editor was used as a tool for 
building ADO in Ontology Web Language format.
RESULTS: ADO was developed with the purpose of containing information relevant 
to four main biological views-preclinical, clinical, etiological, and 
molecular/cellular mechanisms-and was enriched by adding synonyms and 
references. Validation of the lexicalized ontology by means of named entity 
recognition-based methods showed a satisfactory performance (F score = 72%). In 
addition to structural and functional evaluation, a clinical expert in the field 
performed a manual evaluation and curation of ADO. Through integration of ADO 
into an information retrieval environment, we show that the ontology supports 
semantic search in scientific text. The usefulness of ADO is authenticated by 
dedicated use case scenarios.
CONCLUSIONS: Development of ADO as an open ADO is a first attempt to organize 
information related to Alzheimer's disease in a formalized, structured manner. 
We demonstrate that ADO is able to capture both established and scattered 
knowledge existing in scientific text.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.009
PMID: 23830913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]