---
reference_id: PMID:34885724
title: "SugarDrawer: A Web-Based Database Search Tool with Editing Glycan Structures."
authors:
- Tsuchiya S
- Matsubara M
- Aoki-Kinoshita KF
- Yamada I
journal: Molecules
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/molecules26237149
keywords:
- Biological Science Disciplines
- "Databases, Factual"
- Humans
- Internet
- "Polysaccharides/chemistry, classification, genetics, ultrastructure"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SugarDrawer: A Web-Based Database Search Tool with Editing Glycan Structures.
**Authors:** Tsuchiya S, Matsubara M, Aoki-Kinoshita KF, Yamada I
**Journal:** Molecules (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/molecules26237149](https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26237149)

## Content

1. Molecules. 2021 Nov 25;26(23):7149. doi: 10.3390/molecules26237149.

SugarDrawer: A Web-Based Database Search Tool with Editing Glycan Structures.

Tsuchiya S(1), Matsubara M(1), Aoki-Kinoshita KF(2)(3), Yamada I(1).

Author information:
(1)The Noguchi Institute, Tokyo 173-0003, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Soka University, Tokyo 192-8577, 
Japan.
(3)Glycan & Life Systems Integration Center (GaLSIC), Soka University, Tokyo 
192-8577, Japan.

In life science fields, database integration is progressing and contributing to 
collaboration between different research fields, including the glycosciences. 
The integration of glycan databases has greatly progressed collaboration 
worldwide with the development of the international glycan structure repository, 
GlyTouCan. This trend has increased the need for a tool by which researchers in 
various fields can easily search glycan structures from integrated databases. We 
have developed a web-based glycan structure search tool, SugarDrawer, which 
supports the depiction of glycans including ambiguity, such as glycan fragments 
which contain underdetermined linkages, and a database search for glycans drawn 
on the canvas. This tool provides an easy editing feature for various glycan 
structures in just a few steps using template structures and pop-up windows 
which allow users to select specific information for each structure element. 
This tool has a unique feature for selecting possible attachment sites, which is 
defined in the Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG). In addition, this tool 
can input and output glycans in WURCS and GlycoCT formats, which are the most 
commonly-used text formats for glycan structures.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules26237149
PMCID: PMC8659005
PMID: 34885724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.