---
reference_id: PMID:18823568
title: "iRefIndex: a consolidated protein interaction database with provenance."
authors:
- Razick S
- Magklaras G
- Donaldson IM
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-405
keywords:
- Abstracting and Indexing/methods
- Amino Acid Sequence/physiology
- Animals
- Data Compression
- Database Management Systems
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- "Neural Networks, Computer"
- Protein Interaction Mapping/methods
- "Proteins/classification, metabolism"
- Proteome/metabolism
- Proteomics/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# iRefIndex: a consolidated protein interaction database with provenance.
**Authors:** Razick S, Magklaras G, Donaldson IM
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2105-9-405](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-9-405)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Sep 30;9:405. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-405.

iRefIndex: a consolidated protein interaction database with provenance.

Razick S(1), Magklaras G, Donaldson IM.

Author information:
(1)The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, PO Box 1125 Blindern, 
0317 Oslo, Norway. sabry.razick@biotek.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Interaction data for a given protein may be spread across multiple 
databases. We set out to create a unifying index that would facilitate searching 
for these data and that would group together redundant interaction data while 
recording the methods used to perform this grouping.
RESULTS: We present a method to generate a key for a protein interaction record 
and a key for each participant protein. These keys may be generated by anyone 
using only the primary sequence of the proteins, their taxonomy identifiers and 
the Secure Hash Algorithm. Two interaction records will have identical keys if 
they refer to the same set of identical protein sequences and taxonomy 
identifiers. We define records with identical keys as a redundant group. Our 
method required that we map protein database references found in interaction 
records to current protein sequence records. Operations performed during this 
mapping are described by a mapping score that may provide valuable feedback to 
source interaction databases on problematic references that are malformed, 
deprecated, ambiguous or unfound. Keys for protein participants allow for 
retrieval of interaction information independent of the protein references used 
in the original records.
CONCLUSION: We have applied our method to protein interaction records from BIND, 
BioGrid, DIP, HPRD, IntAct, MINT, MPact, MPPI and OPHID. The resulting 
interaction reference index is provided in PSI-MITAB 2.5 format at 
http://irefindex.uio.no. This index may form the basis of alternative redundant 
groupings based on gene identifiers or near sequence identity groupings.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-405
PMCID: PMC2573892
PMID: 18823568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]