---
reference_id: PMID:29743102
title: Extending the DIDEO ontology to include entities from the natural product drug interaction domain of discourse.
authors:
- Judkins J
- Tay-Sontheimer J
- Boyce RD
- Brochhausen M
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-018-0183-z
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Biological Products/pharmacology
- Drug Interactions
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extending the DIDEO ontology to include entities from the natural product drug interaction domain of discourse.
**Authors:** Judkins J, Tay-Sontheimer J, Boyce RD, Brochhausen M
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-018-0183-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-018-0183-z)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2018 May 9;9(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13326-018-0183-z.

Extending the DIDEO ontology to include entities from the natural product drug 
interaction domain of discourse.

Judkins J(1), Tay-Sontheimer J(2), Boyce RD(3), Brochhausen M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(2)School of Pharmacy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. mbrochhausen@uams.edu.

BACKGROUND: Prompted by the frequency of concomitant use of prescription drugs 
with natural products, and the lack of knowledge regarding the impact of 
pharmacokinetic-based natural product-drug interactions (PK-NPDIs), the United 
States National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health has established 
a center of excellence for PK-NPDI. The Center is creating a public database to 
help researchers (primarly pharmacologists and medicinal chemists) to share and 
access data, results, and methods from PK-NPDI studies. In order to represent 
the semantics of the data and foster interoperability, we are extending the 
Drug-Drug Interaction and Evidence Ontology (DIDEO) to include definitions for 
terms used by the data repository. This is feasible due to a number of 
similarities between pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions and PK-NPDIs.
METHODS: To achieve this, we set up an iterative domain analysis in the 
following steps. In Step 1 PK-NPDI domain experts produce a list of terms and 
definitions based on data from PK-NPDI studies, in Step 2 an ontology expert 
creates ontologically appropriate classes and definitions from the list along 
with class axioms, in Step 3 there is an iterative editing process during which 
the domain experts and the ontology experts review, assess, and amend class 
labels and definitions and in Step 4 the ontology expert implements the new 
classes in the DIDEO development branch. This workflow often results in 
different labels and definitions for the new classes in DIDEO than the domain 
experts initially provided; the latter are preserved in DIDEO as separate 
annotations.
RESULTS: Step 1 resulted in a list of 344 terms. During Step 2 we found that 9 
of these terms already existed in DIDEO, and 6 existed in other OBO Foundry 
ontologies. These 6 were imported into DIDEO; additional terms from multiple OBO 
Foundry ontologies were also imported, either to serve as superclasses for new 
terms in the initial list or to build axioms for these terms. At the time of 
writing, 7 terms have definitions ready for review (Step 2), 64 are ready for 
implementation (Step 3) and 112 have been pushed to DIDEO (Step 4). Step 2 also 
suggested that 26 terms of the original list were redundant and did not need 
implementation; the domain experts agreed to remove them. Step 4 resulted in 
many terms being added to DIDEO that help to provide an additional layer of 
granularity in describing experimental conditions and results, e.g. transfected 
cultured cells used in metabolism studies and chemical reactions used in 
measuring enzyme activity. These terms also were integrated into the NaPDI 
repository.
CONCLUSION: We found DIDEO to provide a sound foundation for semantic 
representation of PK-NPDI terms, and we have shown the novelty of the project in 
that DIDEO is the only ontology in which NPDI terms are formally defined.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-018-0183-z
PMCID: PMC5944177
PMID: 29743102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.