---
reference_id: PMID:22324457
title: "Providing the missing link: the exposure science ontology ExO."
authors:
- Mattingly CJ
- McKone TE
- Callahan MA
- Blake JA
- Hubal EA
journal: Environ Sci Technol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1021/es2033857
keywords:
- Environmental Exposure/analysis
- Environmental Health
- Environmental Pollutants
- Humans
- "Models, Theoretical"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Providing the missing link: the exposure science ontology ExO.
**Authors:** Mattingly CJ, McKone TE, Callahan MA, Blake JA, Hubal EA
**Journal:** Environ Sci Technol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1021/es2033857](https://doi.org/10.1021/es2033857)

## Content

1. Environ Sci Technol. 2012 Mar 20;46(6):3046-53. doi: 10.1021/es2033857. Epub 
2012 Mar 12.

Providing the missing link: the exposure science ontology ExO.

Mattingly CJ(1), McKone TE, Callahan MA, Blake JA, Hubal EA.

Author information:
(1)North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, United 
States. cjmattin@ncsu.edu

Environmental health information resources lack exposure data required to 
translate molecular insights, elucidate environmental contributions to diseases, 
and assess human health and ecological risks. We report development of an 
Exposure Ontology, ExO, designed to address this information gap by facilitating 
centralization and integration of exposure data. Major concepts were defined and 
the ontology drafted and evaluated by a working group of exposure scientists and 
other ontology and database experts. The resulting major concepts forming the 
basis for the ontology are "exposure stressor", "exposure receptor", "exposure 
event", and "exposure outcome". Although design of the first version of ExO 
focused on human exposure to chemicals, we anticipate expansion by the 
scientific community to address exposures of human and ecological receptors to 
the full suite of environmental stressors. Like other widely used ontologies, 
ExO is intended to link exposure science and diverse environmental health 
disciplines including toxicology, epidemiology, disease surveillance, and 
epigenetics.

DOI: 10.1021/es2033857
PMCID: PMC3314380
PMID: 22324457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Significant progress has been
made over the past decade in collecting and improving access to genomic,
toxicology, and health data. The resulting information resources,
however, lack extensive and reliable exposure data required to translate
molecular insights, elucidate environmental contributions to diseases,
and assess human health risks at the individual and population level.
Recent advances in a range of fields provide an important opportunity
to extend and integrate the field of exposure science with other research
activities linked to occupational and community environments, genomics,
medical research, urban systems studies, and ecosystems science. Many
fields are developing ontologies and knowledge systems as a way of
organizing and analyzing large amounts of complex information from
multiple scientific disciplines to provide unprecedented perspective
and enable more informed hypothesis development . Here we report on
the development of an Exposure Ontology, ExO, to formalize conceptualization
of exposure science and extend the ability to integrate and analyze
exposure information within the broader context of environmental health.

Exposure is the contact between
a stressor and a human or ecological
receptor.1 Exposure science focuses on
understanding and characterizing receptor interactions with one or
more environmental stressor of concern. Although the primary focus
of exposure science for human-health risk assessment has involved
an individual or human population as a receptor of exposure and a
chemical as an stressor of exposure, these concepts can be more broadly
defined.2 For example, the receptor can
be an organ, tissue or cell, and the stressor can be a biological,
physical, or psychosocial agent. Exposure assessment may include estimating
the magnitude, frequency, and duration of an exposure, along with
characteristics of the receptor.1 For chemical
stressors, exposure information is required to understand a system-level
response to chemical perturbations and implications at the individual
and population levels, as well as to link information on potential
toxicity of environmental contaminants to health outcomes.

In
a recent report by the National Research Council (NRC) of the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS), “Toxicity Testing in the
21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy,” the authors noted that
population-based data and human exposure information are required
at each step of their vision for toxicity testing.3 Exposure needs highlighted in the NRC report include (1)
human exposure data to select doses for toxicity testing facilitating
development of environmentally relevant hazard information; (2) biomonitoring
data to relate real-world human exposures with concentrations that
perturb toxicity pathways (i.e., biologically relevant exposures);
and (3) information on host susceptibility and background exposures
to interpret and extrapolate (i.e., translate) in vitro test results
for risk assessment.

Exposure information is also integral for
understanding interactions
among the environment, genetics, and health.4,5 Common
complex diseases such as asthma, autism, diabetes and obesity arise
from the combined effects of both genetics and environmental exposures.6 As genomic research advances, there is increasing
recognition that understanding the contribution of environmental factors
to disease etiologies will require a more comprehensive view of exposure
and biological response than has traditionally been applied.7

A number of recent advances in a range
of scientific fields make
possible significant growth of the role of exposure science in health
studies. These advances include (a) rapidly expanding biomarkers based
on tissue residues, metabolomics, and other “omics”,
(b) exposure surveys that provide useful but incomplete data on links
between tissue levels and chemical loads in food, air, soil, and indoor
environments, (c) the growing availability of geographical positioning
and geographical information technologies to track both people and
pollutants, and (d) advances in the theory and applications for environmental
chemistry.8 However, the ability to obtain,
evaluate and integrate information about exposures to harmful agents
that arise from diverse sources remains inadequate. The National Institutes
of Health (NIH) reported that recent increases in the incidence of
chronic diseases, such as diabetes, childhood asthma, obesity, or
autism are likely due to changes in our environments, diets, or activity
levels. In defining the goals of its Exposure Biology Program, the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences states that “understanding
the contribution of environmental factors to disease susceptibility
will require a more comprehensive view of exposure and biological
response than what has traditionally been applied”.6 Addressing these challenges requires a more formal
integration of exposure science with advances in related fields so
that it can be leveraged more effectively for regulation, prevention,
and risk management.

Recognizing the critical need for exposure information to inform
chemical design, evaluation and health risk management, the ExpoCast
program was initiated to meet challenges posed by new toxicity testing
approaches.9 The goal of this research
initiative is to advance characterization of exposure required to
translate findings in computational toxicology to information that
can be directly used to support exposure and risk assessment for decision-
making and improved public health. Broadly and long-term, the ExpoCast
program will foster novel exposure science research to link information
on potential toxicity of environmental contaminants to real-world
health outcomes. Significant progress has been made in collecting
and enabling wide access to genomic, toxicology, and health data.10−12 For example, the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD; http://ctdbase.org) promotes understanding about the effects
of environmental chemicals on human health through literature curation
and integration of data describing chemical interactions with genes
and proteins as well as chemical- and gene-disease relationships.10 Outstanding needs identified under the ExpoCast
program by the environmental health, exposure research and risk assessment
communities include (a) centralizing and contextualizing exposure
data into a broader biological framework that includes disease- and
mechanism-based information and (b) provide novel resources for developing
predictive models and hypotheses about the complex connections between
“real-world” environmental exposures and human health
effects. Meeting these outstanding needs will require comprehensive
exposure data curation and integration initiatives. A current roadblock
to implementing such initiatives has been the lack of an exposure
ontology.

An
ontology is a formal representation of knowledge within a domain.
It typically consists of a structured set of terms, their definitions
and an explanation of the relationships between the terms.13 Ontologies are critically important for specifying
data of interest in a consistent manner, thereby enabling unambiguous
data aggregation, analysis and exchange. Currently, the most widely
implemented ontology in biomedical research is the Gene Ontology (GO),
which provides hierarchical controlled terms that describe the biological
processes, molecular functions and cellular components of gene products.14 Widespread use of GO for functional annotation
has been invaluable for facilitating querying, analysis and interpretation
of molecular information from diverse genome data repositories and
high-throughput data sets.15

Several
exposure glossaries have been developed.16−19 Most recently, the International
Programme for Chemical Safety (IPCS), as part of the World Health
Organization’s (WHO’s) Harmonization Project, compiled
57 glossaries containing at least one exposure-related term into a
larger glossary of several hundred terms with the definitions from
each of the glossaries retained under each term.16,17 From these varied definitions, the IPCS committee identified about
20 important terms and developed consensus definitions for these,1 which were then adopted by the International
Society of Exposure Science for use in society publications.18 While the glossaries identify major concepts,
these are not sufficiently detailed or formally structured to enable
comprehensive exposure data curation, integration and analysis. An
exposure ontology, consistent with those being used in toxicology
and other health sciences, is required to formally represent exposure
concepts, the relationships between these concepts and most important,
the relationships between exposure, susceptibility, and toxicology
information.19

A successful exposure
ontology must facilitate the semantic retrieval
of exposure data in the context of environmental health science, medical
surveillance, disease control, health tracking, risk assessment, and
other public health and environmental science endeavors. Its implementation
will enable biocurators to generate standardized annotations from
the published literature and experimental data sets and connect these
annotations to broader-based biological data, similar to what has
been achieved in other biomedical fields. To facilitate improved integration
of and access to exposure information, we initiated development of
an exposure ontology with an initial focus on human
exposure to chemicals. However, the ultimate intent is to provide
classes that can be extended to encompass exposure data for the full
range of stressors and receptors.

Phases of exposure ontology
development. ExO was developed using
a phased approach. During phase I, the exposure science working group
defined major concepts for the ontology based on a pilot curation
project and by leveraging prior glossary development efforts. In phase
II, the ontology draft was developed. The draft was reviewed and tested
by the working group during phase III. Phase IV launches the public
release of the draft ontology for community feedback and expansion.

We used the Gene Ontology project as model for
our ontology development
process20 but also assured broad participation
from fields linked to exposure science. We formed an exposure ontology
working group that included the authors of this paper along with ten
other scientists selected to broadly represent the community of exposure
science, experts in database and ontology development, as well as
expertise from the complementary fields of genetics, molecular biology,
computational toxicology, clinical medicine, regulatory scientists,
environmental chemistry, air quality science, indoor environmental
science, and environmental health sciences. The working group included
research, academic, regulatory, industrial, and nongovernment organizations.
The authors sought input from the working group in preparing both
the manuscript and the case-study curations. We implemented a phased
strategy for developing the ontology, which we call ExO.

To
identify the major biological concepts and frame the exposure ontology,
working group members conducted a pilot curation of a common set of
four publications selected to be broadly representative of exposure
science literature. On the basis of the results from the first round
of this pilot curation, the group defined major concepts or root classes
on which to build a draft ontology, namely exposure stressor, exposure
receptor, exposure event and exposure outcome.

Once the root classes
were outlined and defined, we began structuring these classes into
a hierarchy that consisted of more specific subclasses (often referred
to in hierarchical taxonomies as child terms), as well as the relationships
between these levels of classes or terms. This process involved iterative
rounds of pilot curation to test whether the terms were relevant and
could effectively represent the critical information in the studies
evaluated. Definitions of terms throughout the hierarchy were also
created to ensure clarity and consistency of use. To avoid duplication
with existing ontologies, and to maximize the potential for data aggregation
in the future, we cross-referenced our terms with other ontologies
using the OBO Foundry (http://www.obofoundry.org/) and
National Center for Biomedical Ontology’s (NCBO) BioPortal
(http://bioportal.bioontology.org/) sites. These sites
provide query mechanisms for accessing terms within available biomedical
ontologies. Among the 80 terms in the draft ontology, 34 mapped to
terms from a total of 15 existing ontologies, and the IDs, terms,
and definitions from these ontologies were adopted and database cross-references
(dbxref) were established.

To ensure that
the draft ontology adequately reflected diverse areas of exposure
research, it underwent rigorous review by the full working group.
This process required that each working group member identify and
curate approximately three additional manuscripts each in his/her
specific area of expertise. This round of pilot curation results was
evaluated as a group and used to make necessary refinements to the
ontology.

To maximize the
utility of the exposure ontology, we invite feedback from the public.
To facilitate this process, we formatted the draft ontology using
the standard Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) format and made it available
at multiple sites, including CTD (http://ctdbase.org/downloads/#exposures), OBO Foundry (http://www.obofoundry.org/), and NCBO
BioPortal (http://bioportal.bioontology.org/). Each of
these sites provides a mechanism for the community to submit feedback
to the developers. On a bimonthly basis, feedback will be incorporated
into ExO in a version-controlled manner in coordination with the CTD
project. Modified versions will be appropriately designated and updated
on each of the aforementioned sites for ongoing public review and
development.

ExO is anchored by four major concepts
or root classes that were
identified by the working group as key to capturing exposure information.
These concepts are (1) exposure event, (2) exposure stressor, (3)
exposure receptor, and (4) exposure outcome. They are generically
related in that an “exposure stressor interacts with an exposure
receptor via an exposure event resulting in an exposure outcome.”
We defined these terms as follows or through cross-references to other
ontologies (ontology name, ID):•Exposure Stressor: An agent,
stimulus, activity, or event that causes stress or tension on an organism
and interacts with an exposure receptor during an exposure event.•Exposure Receptor:
An entity
(e.g., a population, organism, tissue, cell) that interacts with an
exposure stressor during an exposure event.•Exposure Event: An interaction
between an exposure stressor and an exposure receptor.•Exposure Outcome: An entity that
results from the interaction between an exposure receptor and an exposure
stressor during an exposure event (e.g., asthma, metabolite formation,
oxidative stress, upregulation of a gene).ExO is structured hierarchically to allow representation of
data related to or characteristic of these concepts at varying levels
of detail. Although aspects of these classes are represented in other
ontologies, to our knowledge they are not related in an existing ontology
with the structure and format required by the exposure science community.
The root classes of ExO, as well as select child terms are illustrated
hierarchically in Figure 2. Shown here, biological,
chemical, biomechanical, physical, and psychosocial agents are types,
or children, of exposure stressors. Each stressor can then be further
defined with additional child terms or attributes through development
of novel terms or by leveraging terms from existing ontologies as
needed (not shown in depth here for simplicity). For example, in a
particular context, a specific chemical agent, such as bisphenol A
(BPA), may have a known source, as well as a designated intensity
and associated spatial and temporal qualities. The ontology aims to
represent the possible spectrum and granularity of
data involved in an exposure event or study.

Exposure Stressor: An agent,
stimulus, activity, or event that causes stress or tension on an organism
and interacts with an exposure receptor during an exposure event.

Exposure Receptor:
An entity
(e.g., a population, organism, tissue, cell) that interacts with an
exposure stressor during an exposure event.

Exposure Event: An interaction
between an exposure stressor and an exposure receptor.

Exposure Outcome: An entity that
results from the interaction between an exposure receptor and an exposure
stressor during an exposure event (e.g., asthma, metabolite formation,
oxidative stress, upregulation of a gene).

Relational view of ExO
concepts (classes). The central concepts
of ExO are shown in relation to an Exposure Event and include Exposure
Stressor, Exposure Receptor, and Exposure Outcome (green circles).
Select child terms (yellow circles) and attributes of these terms
(bulleted lists connected by dashed lines) are also included to provide
a high-level view of the ExO structure.

The development and use of terminology that is
both accepted and
widely used by exposure practitioners is critical for integration
and future growth of the exposure science field. In this work, we
found that the essence of exposure science is the study of the co-occurrence
of a stressor and a receptor. Exposure science provides the spatial/temporal
narrative of the intensity (e.g., concentration) of a stressor at
the boundary between two systems, one functioning as an “environment”
and one functioning as a target (receptor). Exposure science explains
and describes these processes with respect to an outcome. These core
concepts are widely employed in the exposure science literature, but
often with inconsistent descriptions/definitions. In order to make
the exposure ontology compatible with international norms for concepts
and terminology, we started with the IPCS glossary to seed a library
of terms. Because the IPCS glossary is limited, we found it necessary
to generalize, extend and update terminology, an effort that was informed
by the numerous rounds of pilot curation that were carried out by
the working group during ontology development.

The goal
of a biomedical curation project is to identify the major concepts
of a scientific study in the published literature and annotate these
concepts concisely and reproducibly using standardized terms, which
can then be leveraged to analyze these concepts within or across many
studies and other research areas. To demonstrate how ExO can be used
to facilitate curation, we summarize the content of two different
exposure studies and present the terms used to capture the major concepts.21,22•Braun et al. examined the association
between prenatal BPA exposure and behavior changes in 2-year-old children.22 Exposure is believed to result from BPA polymers
that can be hydrolyzed and leach from products like food containers
and baby bottles. The authors used data from 249 mothers and their
children in Cincinnati, Ohio. Maternal urine was collected at ∼16
and 26 weeks of gestation and at birth. BPA concentrations were quantified
using high-performance liquid chromatography–isotope-dilution
tandem mass spectrometry. Child behavior was assessed at 2 years of
age using the second edition of the Behavioral Assessment System for
Children. Results suggested that that prenatal BPA exposure may be
associated with externalizing behaviors in 2-year-old children, especially
among female children.•Rudel et al. sampled indoor air
and dust in 120 homes from Cape Cod, Massachusetts in which they analyzed
89 organic chemicals identified as endocrine-disrupting compounds
(EDCs).21 The authors detected 52 compounds
in air and 66 in dust. The most abundant compounds in air included
phthalates (plasticizers, emulsifiers), o-phenylphenol
(disinfectant), 4-nonylphenol (detergent metabolite), and 4-tert-butylphenol (adhesive) with typical concentrations
of 50–1500 ng/m3. Penta- and tetrabrominated diphenyl
ethers (flame retardants) were frequently detected in dust, and 2,3-dibromo-1-propanol
was detected in air and dust. Twenty-three pesticides were detected
in air and 27 were detected in dust, the most abundant included permethrins
and piperonyl butoxide. For virtually all target compounds, levels
detected in indoor air were higher than those previously reported.
This study provides a basis for prioritizing exposure research for
individual EDCs and mixtures and new tools for exposure assessment
in health studies.Table 1 illustrates how the terms currently
defined in ExO were used to effectively capture the major concepts
of these two very different studies. The power of this exercise becomes
apparent in the context of a large-scale curation and integration
effort because these terms can then be used to query and aggregate
data across studies in ways that are not otherwise
possible from free-text summaries or abstracts. The importance of
flexible query and analysis capacities is continually demonstrated
through the increasing reliance of the research community on large-scale
public biological database projects: all of which rely on ontologies
and controlled vocabularies to store and manage the underlying data.
Notably, the NIEHS awarded funds to support comprehensive curation
and integration of exposure data into the existing, freely available
Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (http://ctd.mdibl.org). Specifically, this project will use ExO to (a) curate, centralize
and contextualize exposure data into a broader biological framework
that includes disease- and mechanism-based information and (b) develop
predictive models and hypotheses about the complex connections between
real-world environmental exposures and human health effects.

Braun et al. examined the association
between prenatal BPA exposure and behavior changes in 2-year-old children.22 Exposure is believed to result from BPA polymers
that can be hydrolyzed and leach from products like food containers
and baby bottles. The authors used data from 249 mothers and their
children in Cincinnati, Ohio. Maternal urine was collected at ∼16
and 26 weeks of gestation and at birth. BPA concentrations were quantified
using high-performance liquid chromatography–isotope-dilution
tandem mass spectrometry. Child behavior was assessed at 2 years of
age using the second edition of the Behavioral Assessment System for
Children. Results suggested that that prenatal BPA exposure may be
associated with externalizing behaviors in 2-year-old children, especially
among female children.

Rudel et al. sampled indoor air
and dust in 120 homes from Cape Cod, Massachusetts in which they analyzed
89 organic chemicals identified as endocrine-disrupting compounds
(EDCs).21 The authors detected 52 compounds
in air and 66 in dust. The most abundant compounds in air included
phthalates (plasticizers, emulsifiers), o-phenylphenol
(disinfectant), 4-nonylphenol (detergent metabolite), and 4-tert-butylphenol (adhesive) with typical concentrations
of 50–1500 ng/m3. Penta- and tetrabrominated diphenyl
ethers (flame retardants) were frequently detected in dust, and 2,3-dibromo-1-propanol
was detected in air and dust. Twenty-three pesticides were detected
in air and 27 were detected in dust, the most abundant included permethrins
and piperonyl butoxide. For virtually all target compounds, levels
detected in indoor air were higher than those previously reported.
This study provides a basis for prioritizing exposure research for
individual EDCs and mixtures and new tools for exposure assessment
in health studies.

The ACToR system was developed by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency to make data on health effects and exposure potential
for environmental chemicals readily accessible and to provide a resource
for model-building to fill gaps in environmental health risk information.23 The ACToR system is comprised of four interacting
databases: core ACToR (includes chemical identifiers and summary data
on hazard, exposure, use); ToxRefDB (a compilation of in vivo toxicity
data from guideline studies); ExpoCastDB (human exposure measurement
data from observational studies); and ToxCastDB (data from high-throughput
screening [HTS] programs).11

ExpoCastDB
was developed to improve access to human exposure data from observational
studies, and currently houses results for a set of studies funded
by EPA’s National Exposure Research Laboratory. Data currently
include amounts of study chemicals found in food, drinking water,
air, dust, indoor surfaces and urine. ExpoCastDB is tied into the
ACToR system through generic chemical linkages to facilitate integration
of exposure measurement data with data on chemical toxicity, environmental
fate, manufacture and use, and ToxCast HTS results. Within ExpoCastDB,
controlled vocabularies are used to facilitate searching and analyses
across data sets. The ExpoCastDB conceptual data model is designed
to eventually capture key information for characterizing exposure,
details of study design, and metadata associated with sample analysis.
The controlled vocabulary and data model for ExpoCastDB are being
developed to be consistent with ExO to facilitate linkages with other
information resources required to support computational toxicology
and chemical risk assessment as well as to encourage standardized
reporting of observational exposure information.

The current
version of ExO includes very high-level (i.e., more
general) concepts and an expanding foundation of child (i.e., more
specific) terms. Through future development and with input from the
scientific community, these branches will be further specified. In
keeping with an open source approach, we anticipate that existing
ontologies will be leveraged heavily for this purpose (e.g., CHEBI
and MeSH for “Chemical agent” Stressors; DO, OMIM and
MeSH for “Disease” Outcomes). Such cross-referencing
will underscore where ExO and exposure science fits into a broader
knowledge space and where it may add value to existing ontologies
and biomedical resources. Consistent use of ExO in efforts such as
ACToR and CTD will provide increasing opportunities for collaboration,
diverse cross-referencing of data and analyses of exposure information
in a broader context than was previously possible.

Similar to other
biomedical ontologies, the potential applications
for ExO are far-reaching and include (a) capturing and centralizing
exposure data, (b) facilitating exchange and integration of exposure
data, (c) developing exposure-relevant text mining tools (natural
language processing or other approaches), and (d) leveraging comprehensive
exposure information for computational analysis and modeling.15 Figure 3 provides a high-level
view of the major exposure concepts (root classes) in ExO that are
not currently represented among available ontologies and how these
concepts can be integrated into a knowledge system with a broader
spectrum of biological data. ExO will enhance access to exposure data
sets through community adoption of these terms and contribute to the
needed centralization by enabling consistent curation, integration
and aggregation of exposure data (see application examples described
above).

High-level schematic of ExO integration within a broader biological
context. ExO will enable curation, aggregation and integration of
exposure data with other important aspects of environmental health
research such as, but not limited to chemical stressors, disease outcomes
and molecular pathways. Such integration will expand the impact of
exposure data and inform existing environmental health data by providing
associated real-world exposure context. Light blue boxes show existing,
relevant data sets and ontologies. Dark blue boxes highlight new data
representations and associations made possible with an exposure ontology,
ExO (Figure was modified from ref (24)).

Although knowledge-discovery tools are new to the
exposure science
community, these tools are critical for leveraging exposure information
to design health studies and interpret results for improved public
health decisions. Standardized ontologies define relationships, allow
for automated reasoning, and facilitate meta-analyses. ExO will facilitate
development of biologically relevant exposure metrics, design of in
vitro toxicity tests, and incorporation of information on susceptibility
and background exposures for risk assessment. In this approach, there
are multiple levels of organization, from the global environment down
through ecosystems, communities, indoor spaces, populations, organisms,
tissues, and cells. We anticipate that the exposure science and environmental
health community will adopt and contribute to this work, as wide acceptance
is key to integration and federated searching of exposure data to
support environmental and public health research. In particular, we
anticipate acceptance of the concept that exposure science provides
the spatial/temporal narrative about the intensity (concentration)
of a stressor at the boundary between two systems: one functioning
as an “environment” (stressor) and one functioning as
a target (receptor). An agreed-upon exposure ontology with clear definitions
and relationships should help to facilitate decision-making, study
design and prioritization of research initiatives by enhancing the
capacity for data collection and analysis in a manner that has not
been possible previously. Because the exposure narrative informs research,
policy, and regulation, the exposure ontology will significantly benefit
these different activities as the exposure literature grows and diversifies.
We encourage members of the community to review the ontology and provide
comments and term additions as needed.