---
reference_id: PMID:22120663
title: "INOH: ontology-based highly structured database of signal transduction pathways."
authors:
- Yamamoto S
- Sakai N
- Nakamura H
- Fukagawa H
- Fukuda K
- Takagi T
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/database/bar052
keywords:
- Animals
- Caenorhabditis elegans
- Computational Biology/methods
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drosophila melanogaster
- Mammals
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Signal Transduction
- Terminology as Topic
- User-Computer Interface
- Xenopus laevis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INOH: ontology-based highly structured database of signal transduction pathways.
**Authors:** Yamamoto S, Sakai N, Nakamura H, Fukagawa H, Fukuda K, Takagi T
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bar052](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bar052)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2011 Nov 26;2011:bar052. doi: 10.1093/database/bar052.
Print  2011.

INOH: ontology-based highly structured database of signal transduction pathways.

Yamamoto S(1), Sakai N, Nakamura H, Fukagawa H, Fukuda K, Takagi T.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Bioinformatics Research and Development, Japan Science and 
Technology Agency, Kashiwa, Japan.

The Integrating Network Objects with Hierarchies (INOH) database is a highly 
structured, manually curated database of signal transduction pathways including 
Mammalia, Xenopus laevis, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans and 
canonical. Since most pathway knowledge resides in scientific articles, the 
database focuses on curating and encoding textual knowledge into a 
machine-processable form. We use a hierarchical pathway representation model 
with a compound graph, and every pathway component in the INOH database is 
annotated by a set of uniquely developed ontologies. Finally, we developed the 
Similarity Search using the combination of a compound graph and hierarchical 
ontologies. The INOH database is to be a good resource for many users who want 
to analyze a large protein network. INOH ontologies and 73 signal transduction 
and 29 metabolic pathway diagrams (including over 6155 interactions and 3395 
protein entities) are freely available in INOH XML and BioPAX formats. Database 
URL: http://www.inoh.org/

DOI: 10.1093/database/bar052
PMCID: PMC3225078
PMID: 22120663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]