---
reference_id: PMID:23299411
title: "Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB): an integrative and interactive database for rice genomics."
authors:
- Sakai H
- Lee SS
- Tanaka T
- Numa H
- Kim J
- Kawahara Y
- Wakimoto H
- Yang CC
- Iwamoto M
- Abe T
- Yamada Y
- Muto A
- Inokuchi H
- Ikemura T
- Matsumoto T
- Sasaki T
- Itoh T
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs183
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Genes, Plant"
- Genetic Loci
- Genomics/methods
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Oryza/classification, genetics"
- Phylogeny
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Search Engine
- Sequence Homology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB): an integrative and interactive database for rice genomics.
**Authors:** Sakai H, Lee SS, Tanaka T, Numa H, Kim J, Kawahara Y, Wakimoto H, Yang CC, Iwamoto M, Abe T, Yamada Y, Muto A, Inokuchi H, Ikemura T, Matsumoto T, Sasaki T, Itoh T
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/pcp/pcs183](https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcs183)

## Content

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb;54(2):e6. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs183. Epub 2013 Jan
7.

Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB): an integrative and interactive 
database for rice genomics.

Sakai H(1), Lee SS, Tanaka T, Numa H, Kim J, Kawahara Y, Wakimoto H, Yang CC, 
Iwamoto M, Abe T, Yamada Y, Muto A, Inokuchi H, Ikemura T, Matsumoto T, Sasaki 
T, Itoh T.

Author information:
(1)Agrogenomics Research Center, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB, http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/) has 
been providing a comprehensive set of gene annotations for the genome sequence 
of rice, Oryza sativa (japonica group) cv. Nipponbare. Since the first release 
in 2005, RAP-DB has been updated several times along with the genome assembly 
updates. Here, we present our newest RAP-DB based on the latest genome assembly, 
Os-Nipponbare-Reference-IRGSP-1.0 (IRGSP-1.0), which was released in 2011. We 
detected 37,869 loci by mapping transcript and protein sequences of 150 monocot 
species. To provide plant researchers with highly reliable and up to date rice 
gene annotations, we have been incorporating literature-based manually curated 
data, and 1,626 loci currently incorporate literature-based annotation data, 
including commonly used gene names or gene symbols. Transcriptional activities 
are shown at the nucleotide level by mapping RNA-Seq reads derived from 27 
samples. We also mapped the Illumina reads of a Japanese leading japonica 
cultivar, Koshihikari, and a Chinese indica cultivar, Guangluai-4, to the genome 
and show alignments together with the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 
gene functional annotations through a newly developed browser, Short-Read 
Assembly Browser (S-RAB). We have developed two satellite databases, Plant Gene 
Family Database (PGFD) and Integrative Database of Cereal Gene Phylogeny 
(IDCGP), which display gene family and homologous gene relationships among 
diverse plant species. RAP-DB and the satellite databases offer simple and 
user-friendly web interfaces, enabling plant and genome researchers to access 
the data easily and facilitating a broad range of plant research topics.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcs183
PMCID: PMC3583025
PMID: 23299411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]