---
reference_id: PMID:18629109
title: An upper-level ontology for the biomedical domain.
authors:
- McCray AT
journal: Comp Funct Genomics
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1002/cfg.255
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An upper-level ontology for the biomedical domain.
**Authors:** McCray AT
**Journal:** Comp Funct Genomics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cfg.255](https://doi.org/10.1002/cfg.255)

## Content

1. Comp Funct Genomics. 2003;4(1):80-4. doi: 10.1002/cfg.255.

An upper-level ontology for the biomedical domain.

McCray AT(1).

Author information:
(1)National Library of Medicine, Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 8600, USA. 
mccray@nlm.nih.gov

At the US National Library of Medicine we have developed the Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS), whose goal it is to provide integrated access to a large 
number of biomedical resources by unifying the vocabularies that are used to 
access those resources. The UMLS currently interrelates some 60 controlled 
vocabularies in the biomedical domain. The UMLS coverage is quite extensive, 
including not only many concepts in clinical medicine, but also a large number 
of concepts applicable to the broad domain of the life sciences. In order to 
provide an overarching conceptual framework for all UMLS concepts, we developed 
an upper-level ontology, called the UMLS semantic network. The semantic network, 
through its 134 semantic types, provides a consistent categorization of all 
concepts represented in the UMLS. The 54 links between the semantic types 
provide the structure for the network and represent important relationships in 
the biomedical domain. Because of the growing number of information resources 
that contain genetic information, the UMLS coverage in this area is being 
expanded. We recently integrated the taxonomy of organisms developed by the 
NLM's National Center for Biotechnology Information, and we are currently 
working together with the developers of the Gene Ontology to integrate this 
resource, as well. As additional, standard, ontologies become publicly 
available, we expect to integrate these into the UMLS construct.

DOI: 10.1002/cfg.255
PMCID: PMC2447396
PMID: 18629109