---
reference_id: PMID:34520557
title: "GTDB: an ongoing census of bacterial and archaeal diversity through a phylogenetically consistent, rank normalized and complete genome-based taxonomy."
authors:
- Parks DH
- Chuvochina M
- Rinke C
- Mussig AJ
- Chaumeil PA
- Hugenholtz P
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab776
keywords:
- "Archaea/classification, genetics"
- "Bacteria/classification, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genome, Archaeal"
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- Internet
- Metagenome
- Phylogeny
- "Prokaryotic Cells/classification, cytology, metabolism"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GTDB: an ongoing census of bacterial and archaeal diversity through a phylogenetically consistent, rank normalized and complete genome-based taxonomy.
**Authors:** Parks DH, Chuvochina M, Rinke C, Mussig AJ, Chaumeil PA, Hugenholtz P
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab776](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab776)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D785-D794. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab776.

GTDB: an ongoing census of bacterial and archaeal diversity through a 
phylogenetically consistent, rank normalized and complete genome-based taxonomy.

Parks DH(1), Chuvochina M(1), Rinke C(1), Mussig AJ(1), Chaumeil PA(1), 
Hugenholtz P(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Queensland, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, 
Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, QLD 4072, Australia.

The Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB; https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org) provides a 
phylogenetically consistent and rank normalized genome-based taxonomy for 
prokaryotic genomes sourced from the NCBI Assembly database. GTDB R06-RS202 
spans 254 090 bacterial and 4316 archaeal genomes, a 270% increase since the 
introduction of the GTDB in November, 2017. These genomes are organized into 45 
555 bacterial and 2339 archaeal species clusters which is a 200% increase since 
the integration of species clusters into the GTDB in June, 2019. Here, we 
explore prokaryotic diversity from the perspective of the GTDB and highlight the 
importance of metagenome-assembled genomes in expanding available genomic 
representation. We also discuss improvements to the GTDB website which allow 
tracking of taxonomic changes, easy assessment of genome assembly quality, and 
identification of genomes assembled from type material or used as species 
representatives. Methodological updates and policy changes made since the 
inception of the GTDB are then described along with the procedure used to update 
species clusters in the GTDB. We conclude with a discussion on the use of 
average nucleotide identities as a pragmatic approach for delineating 
prokaryotic species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab776
PMCID: PMC8728215
PMID: 34520557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]