---
reference_id: PMID:40323307
title: "OLS4: a new Ontology Lookup Service for a growing interdisciplinary knowledge ecosystem."
authors:
- McLaughlin J
- Lagrimas J
- Iqbal H
- Parkinson H
- Harmse H
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaf279
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Software
- Computational Biology/methods
- User-Computer Interface
- Search Engine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# OLS4: a new Ontology Lookup Service for a growing interdisciplinary knowledge ecosystem.
**Authors:** McLaughlin J, Lagrimas J, Iqbal H, Parkinson H, Harmse H
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/btaf279](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaf279)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2025 May 6;41(5):btaf279. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaf279.

OLS4: a new Ontology Lookup Service for a growing interdisciplinary knowledge 
ecosystem.

McLaughlin J(1), Lagrimas J(1), Iqbal H(1), Parkinson H(1), Harmse H(1).

Author information:
(1)Samples, Phenotypes and Ontologies Team (SPOT), EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Genome 
Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, United Kingdom.

SUMMARY: The Ontology Lookup Service (OLS) is an open source search engine for 
ontologies which is used extensively in the bioinformatics and chemistry 
communities to annotate biological and biomedical data with ontology terms. 
Recently, there has been a significant increase in the size and complexity of 
ontologies due to new scales of biological knowledge, such as spatial 
transcriptomics, new ontology development methodologies, and curation on an 
increased scale. Existing Web-based tools for ontology browsing such as 
BioPortal and OntoBee do not support the full range of definitions used by 
today's ontologies. In order to support the community going forward, we have 
developed OLS4, implementing the complete OWL2 specification, 
internationalization support for multiple languages, and a new user interface 
with UX enhancements such as links out to external databases. OLS4 has replaced 
OLS3 in production at EMBL-EBI and has a backward compatible API supporting 
users of OLS3 to transition.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The source code of OLS is available at 
https://github.com/EBISPOT/ols4 and DOI 10.5281/zenodo.14960290 with Apache 2.0 
License. A freely available implementation is accessible at 
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaf279
PMCID: PMC12094816
PMID: 40323307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]