---
reference_id: PMID:10082069
title: The medical dictionary for regulatory activities (MedDRA).
authors:
- Brown EG
- Wood L
- Wood S
journal: Drug Saf
year: '1999'
doi: 10.2165/00002018-199920020-00002
keywords:
- Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting Systems
- "Dictionaries, Medical as Topic"
- Drug Approval
- Europe
- Global Health
- Humans
- International Cooperation
- "Product Surveillance, Postmarketing"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The medical dictionary for regulatory activities (MedDRA).
**Authors:** Brown EG, Wood L, Wood S
**Journal:** Drug Saf (1999)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00002018-199920020-00002](https://doi.org/10.2165/00002018-199920020-00002)

## Content

1. Drug Saf. 1999 Feb;20(2):109-17. doi: 10.2165/00002018-199920020-00002.

The medical dictionary for regulatory activities (MedDRA).

Brown EG(1), Wood L, Wood S.

Author information:
(1)Medicines Control Agency, London, England. browns@globnet.co.uk

The International Conference on Harmonisation has agreed upon the structure and 
content of the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) version 2.0 
which should become available in the early part of 1999. This medical 
terminology is intended for use in the pre- and postmarketing phases of the 
medicines regulatory process, covering diagnoses, symptoms and signs, adverse 
drug reactions and therapeutic indications, the names and qualitative results of 
investigations, surgical and medical procedures, and medical/social history. It 
can be used for recording adverse events and medical history in clinical trials, 
in the analysis and tabulations of data from these trials and in the expedited 
submission of safety data to government regulatory authorities, as well as in 
constructing standard product information and documentation for applications for 
marketing authorisation. After licensing of a medicine, it may be used in 
pharmacovigilance and is expected to be the preferred terminology for 
international electronic regulatory communication. MedDRA is a hierarchical 
terminology with 5 levels and is multiaxial: terms may exist in more than 1 
vertical axis, providing specificity of terms for data entry and flexibility in 
data retrieval. Terms in MedDRA were derived from several sources including the 
WHO's adverse reaction terminology (WHO-ART), Coding Symbols for a Thesaurus of 
Adverse Reaction Terms (COSTART), International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 
9 and ICD9-CM. It will be maintained, further developed and distributed by a 
Maintenance Support Services Organisation (MSSO). It is anticipated that using 
MedDRA will improve the quality of data captured on databases, support effective 
analysis by providing clinically relevant groupings of terms and facilitate 
electronic communication of data, although as a new tool, users will need to 
invest time in gaining expertise in its use.

DOI: 10.2165/00002018-199920020-00002
PMID: 10082069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]