---
reference_id: PMID:24573882
title: "COMPARTMENTS: unification and visualization of protein subcellular localization evidence."
authors:
- Binder JX
- Pletscher-Frankild S
- Tsafou K
- Stolte C
- "O'Donoghue SI"
- Schneider R
- Jensen LJ
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/database/bau012
keywords:
- Cell Compartmentation
- Data Mining
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- Internet
- Proteins/metabolism
- Subcellular Fractions/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COMPARTMENTS: unification and visualization of protein subcellular localization evidence.
**Authors:** Binder JX, Pletscher-Frankild S, Tsafou K, Stolte C, O'Donoghue SI, Schneider R, Jensen LJ
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bau012](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bau012)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2014 Feb 25;2014:bau012. doi: 10.1093/database/bau012.
Print  2014.

COMPARTMENTS: unification and visualization of protein subcellular localization 
evidence.

Binder JX(1), Pletscher-Frankild S, Tsafou K, Stolte C, O'Donoghue SI, Schneider 
R, Jensen LJ.

Author information:
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBL), 69117 Heidelberg, Germany, Bioinformatics Core Facility, 
Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of Luxembourg, 4362 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, Department of Disease Systems Biology, Novo 
Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark, CSIRO 
Computational Informatics, Sydney, NSW 2113 Australia and Garvan Institute of 
Medical Research, Sydney, NSW 2100, Australia.

Information on protein subcellular localization is important to understand the 
cellular functions of proteins. Currently, such information is manually curated 
from the literature, obtained from high-throughput microscopy-based screens and 
predicted from primary sequence. To get a comprehensive view of the localization 
of a protein, it is thus necessary to consult multiple databases and prediction 
tools. To address this, we present the COMPARTMENTS resource, which integrates 
all sources listed above as well as the results of automatic text mining. The 
resource is automatically kept up to date with source databases, and all 
localization evidence is mapped onto common protein identifiers and Gene 
Ontology terms. We further assign confidence scores to the localization evidence 
to facilitate comparison of different types and sources of evidence. To further 
improve the comparability, we assign confidence scores based on the type and 
source of the localization evidence. Finally, we visualize the unified 
localization evidence for a protein on a schematic cell to provide a simple 
overview. Database URL: http://compartments.jensenlab.org.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bau012
PMCID: PMC3935310
PMID: 24573882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]