---
reference_id: PMID:36305825
title: "The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium: comprehensive knockout phenotyping underpinning the study of human disease."
authors:
- Groza T
- Gomez FL
- Mashhadi HH
- Muñoz-Fuentes V
- Gunes O
- Wilson R
- Cacheiro P
- Frost A
- Keskivali-Bond P
- Vardal B
- McCoy A
- Cheng TK
- Santos L
- Wells S
- Smedley D
- Mallon AM
- Parkinson H
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac972
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium: comprehensive knockout phenotyping underpinning the study of human disease.
**Authors:** Groza T, Gomez FL, Mashhadi HH, Muñoz-Fuentes V, Gunes O, Wilson R, Cacheiro P, Frost A, Keskivali-Bond P, Vardal B, McCoy A, Cheng TK, Santos L, Wells S, Smedley D, Mallon AM, Parkinson H
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac972](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac972)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D1038-D1045. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac972.

The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium: comprehensive knockout 
phenotyping underpinning the study of human disease.

Groza T(1), Gomez FL(1), Mashhadi HH(1), Muñoz-Fuentes V(1), Gunes O(1), Wilson 
R(1), Cacheiro P(2), Frost A(3), Keskivali-Bond P(3), Vardal B(3), McCoy A(3), 
Cheng TK(3), Santos L(4), Wells S(3), Smedley D(2), Mallon AM(4), Parkinson 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Welcome Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK.
(2)William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London 
EC1M 6BQ, UK.
(3)Mary Lyon Centre at MRC Harwell, Harwell Campus OX11 7UE, UK.
(4)Research Data Team, The Turing Institute, 96 Euston Rd, London NW1 2DB, UK.

The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium (IMPC; 
https://www.mousephenotype.org/) web portal makes available curated, integrated 
and analysed knockout mouse phenotyping data generated by the IMPC project 
consisting of 85M data points and over 95,000 statistically significant 
phenotype hits mapped to human diseases. The IMPC portal delivers a substantial 
reference dataset that supports the enrichment of various domain-specific 
projects and databases, as well as the wider research and clinical community, 
where the IMPC genotype-phenotype knowledge contributes to the molecular 
diagnosis of patients affected by rare disorders. Data from 9,000 mouse lines 
and 750 000 images provides vital resources enabling the interpretation of the 
ignorome, and advancing our knowledge on mammalian gene function and the 
mechanisms underlying phenotypes associated with human diseases. The resource is 
widely integrated and the lines have been used in over 4,600 publications 
indicating the value of the data and the materials.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac972
PMCID: PMC9825559
PMID: 36305825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]