---
reference_id: PMID:23482073
title: The HUPO proteomics standards initiative- mass spectrometry controlled vocabulary.
authors:
- Mayer G
- Montecchi-Palazzi L
- Ovelleiro D
- Jones AR
- Binz PA
- Deutsch EW
- Chambers M
- Kallhardt M
- Levander F
- Shofstahl J
- Orchard S
- Vizcaíno JA
- Hermjakob H
- Stephan C
- Meyer HE
- Eisenacher M
- HUPO-PSI Group
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/database/bat009
keywords:
- Humans
- Mass Spectrometry/standards
- Proteome/metabolism
- Proteomics/standards
- Reference Standards
- Statistics as Topic
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
- Workflow
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The HUPO proteomics standards initiative- mass spectrometry controlled vocabulary.
**Authors:** Mayer G, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Ovelleiro D, Jones AR, Binz PA, Deutsch EW, Chambers M, Kallhardt M, Levander F, Shofstahl J, Orchard S, Vizcaíno JA, Hermjakob H, Stephan C, Meyer HE, Eisenacher M, HUPO-PSI Group
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/bat009](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bat009)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2013 Mar 12;2013:bat009. doi: 10.1093/database/bat009.
Print  2013.

The HUPO proteomics standards initiative- mass spectrometry controlled 
vocabulary.

Mayer G(1), Montecchi-Palazzi L, Ovelleiro D, Jones AR, Binz PA, Deutsch EW, 
Chambers M, Kallhardt M, Levander F, Shofstahl J, Orchard S, Vizcaíno JA, 
Hermjakob H, Stephan C, Meyer HE, Eisenacher M; HUPO-PSI Group.

Author information:
(1)Medizinisches Proteom Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, D-44801 Bochum, 
Germany.

Controlled vocabularies (CVs), i.e. a collection of predefined terms describing 
a modeling domain, used for the semantic annotation of data, and ontologies are 
used in structured data formats and databases to avoid inconsistencies in 
annotation, to have a unique (and preferably short) accession number and to give 
researchers and computer algorithms the possibility for more expressive semantic 
annotation of data. The Human Proteome Organization (HUPO)-Proteomics Standards 
Initiative (PSI) makes extensive use of ontologies/CVs in their data formats. 
The PSI-Mass Spectrometry (MS) CV contains all the terms used in the PSI 
MS-related data standards. The CV contains a logical hierarchical structure to 
ensure ease of maintenance and the development of software that makes use of 
complex semantics. The CV contains terms required for a complete description of 
an MS analysis pipeline used in proteomics, including sample labeling, digestion 
enzymes, instrumentation parts and parameters, software used for identification 
and quantification of peptides/proteins and the parameters and scores used to 
determine their significance. Owing to the range of topics covered by the CV, 
collaborative development across several PSI working groups, including 
proteomics research groups, instrument manufacturers and software vendors, was 
necessary. In this article, we describe the overall structure of the CV, the 
process by which it has been developed and is maintained and the dependencies on 
other ontologies. Database URL: 
http://psidev.cvs.sourceforge.net/viewvc/psidev/psi/psi-ms/mzML/controlledVocabulary/psi-ms.obo.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bat009
PMCID: PMC3594986
PMID: 23482073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]