---
reference_id: PMID:25140222
title: "Nose to tail, roots to shoots: spatial descriptors for phenotypic diversity in the Biological Spatial Ontology."
authors:
- Dahdul WM
- Cui H
- Mabee PM
- Mungall CJ
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Walls RL
- Haendel MA
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-34
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nose to tail, roots to shoots: spatial descriptors for phenotypic diversity in the Biological Spatial Ontology.
**Authors:** Dahdul WM, Cui H, Mabee PM, Mungall CJ, Osumi-Sutherland D, Walls RL, Haendel MA
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-34](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-34)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Aug 11;5:34. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-34. eCollection
 2014.

Nose to tail, roots to shoots: spatial descriptors for phenotypic diversity in 
the Biological Spatial Ontology.

Dahdul WM(1), Cui H(2), Mabee PM(3), Mungall CJ(4), Osumi-Sutherland D(5), Walls 
RL(6), Haendel MA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD, USA ; 
National Evolutionary Synthesis Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)School of Information Resource and Library Science, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD, USA.
(4)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)The iPlant Collaborative, Bio5 Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 
USA.
(7)Library and Department of Medical Informatics & Epidemiology, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

BACKGROUND: Spatial terminology is used in anatomy to indicate precise, relative 
positions of structures in an organism. While these terms are often standardized 
within specific fields of biology, they can differ dramatically across taxa. 
Such differences in usage can impair our ability to unambiguously refer to 
anatomical position when comparing anatomy or phenotypes across species. We 
developed the Biological Spatial Ontology (BSPO) to standardize the description 
of spatial and topological relationships across taxa to enable the discovery of 
comparable phenotypes.
RESULTS: BSPO currently contains 146 classes and 58 relations representing 
anatomical axes, gradients, regions, planes, sides, and surfaces. These concepts 
can be used at multiple biological scales and in a diversity of taxa, including 
plants, animals and fungi. The BSPO is used to provide a source of anatomical 
location descriptors for logically defining anatomical entity classes in anatomy 
ontologies. Spatial reasoning is further enhanced in anatomy ontologies by 
integrating spatial relations such as dorsal_to into class descriptions (e.g., 
'dorsolateral placode' dorsal_to some 'epibranchial placode').
CONCLUSIONS: The BSPO is currently used by projects that require standardized 
anatomical descriptors for phenotype annotation and ontology integration across 
a diversity of taxa. Anatomical location classes are also useful for describing 
phenotypic differences, such as morphological variation in position of 
structures resulting from evolution within and across species.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-34
PMCID: PMC4137724
PMID: 25140222