---
reference_id: PMID:26208972
title: "Mouse anatomy ontologies: enhancements and tools for exploring and integrating biomedical data."
authors:
- Hayamizu TF
- Baldock RA
- Ringwald M
journal: Mamm Genome
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9584-9
keywords:
- Animals
- Computational Biology
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Mice
- Organ Specificity/genetics
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mouse anatomy ontologies: enhancements and tools for exploring and integrating biomedical data.
**Authors:** Hayamizu TF, Baldock RA, Ringwald M
**Journal:** Mamm Genome (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00335-015-9584-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00335-015-9584-9)

## Content

1. Mamm Genome. 2015 Oct;26(9-10):422-30. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9584-9. Epub
2015  Jul 25.

Mouse anatomy ontologies: enhancements and tools for exploring and integrating 
biomedical data.

Hayamizu TF(1), Baldock RA(2), Ringwald M(3).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME, 04609, USA.
(2)MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, 
Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK.
(3)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME, 04609, USA. 
martin.ringwald@jax.org.

Mouse anatomy ontologies provide standard nomenclature for describing normal and 
mutant mouse anatomy, and are essential for the description and integration of 
data directly related to anatomy such as gene expression patterns. Building on 
our previous work on anatomical ontologies for the embryonic and adult mouse, we 
have recently developed a new and substantially revised anatomical ontology 
covering all life stages of the mouse. Anatomical terms are organized in complex 
hierarchies enabling multiple relationships between terms. Tissue classification 
as well as partonomic, developmental, and other types of relationships can be 
represented. Hierarchies for specific developmental stages can also be derived. 
The ontology forms the core of the eMouse Atlas Project (EMAP) and is used 
extensively for annotating and integrating gene expression patterns and other 
data by the Gene Expression Database (GXD), the eMouse Atlas of Gene Expression 
(EMAGE) and other database resources. Here we illustrate the evolution of the 
developmental and adult mouse anatomical ontologies toward one combined system. 
We report on recent ontology enhancements, describe the current status, and 
discuss future plans for mouse anatomy ontology development and application in 
integrating data resources.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-015-9584-9
PMCID: PMC4602063
PMID: 26208972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]