---
reference_id: PMID:14620375
title: An ontology of human developmental anatomy.
authors:
- Hunter A
- Kaufman MH
- McKay A
- Baldock R
- Simmen MW
- Bard JB
journal: J Anat
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.00224.x
keywords:
- "Databases, Factual"
- "Embryo, Mammalian/anatomy & histology"
- Embryonic and Fetal Development/physiology
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- Information Storage and Retrieval
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An ontology of human developmental anatomy.
**Authors:** Hunter A, Kaufman MH, McKay A, Baldock R, Simmen MW, Bard JB
**Journal:** J Anat (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.00224.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.00224.x)

## Content

1. J Anat. 2003 Oct;203(4):347-55. doi: 10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.00224.x.

An ontology of human developmental anatomy.

Hunter A(1), Kaufman MH, McKay A, Baldock R, Simmen MW, Bard JB.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Division of Biomedical Sciences, Hugh Robson Building, 
University of Edinburgh, UK.

Human developmental anatomy has been organized as structured lists of the major 
constituent tissues present during each of Carnegie stages 1-20 (E1-E50, 
approximately 8500 anatomically defined tissue items). For each of these stages, 
the tissues have been organized as a hierarchy in which an individual tissue is 
catalogued as part of a larger tissue. Such a formal representation of knowledge 
is known as an ontology and this anatomical ontology can be used in databases to 
store, organize and search for data associated with the tissues present at each 
developmental stage. The anatomical data for compiling these hierarchies comes 
from the literature, from observations on embryos in the Patten Collection (Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA) and from comparisons with mouse tissues at similar stages of 
development. The ontology is available in three versions. The first gives 
hierarchies of the named tissues present at each Carnegie stage 
(http://www.ana.ed.ac.uk/anatomy/database/humat/) and is intended to help 
analyse both normal and abnormal human embryos; it carries hyperlinked notes on 
some ambiguities in the literature that have been clarified through analysing 
sectioned material. The second contains many additional subsidiary tissue 
domains and is intended for handling tissue-associated data (e.g. 
gene-expression) in a database. This version is available at the humat site and 
at http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Resources/intro.html/), and has been designed to 
be interoperable with the ontology for mouse developmental anatomy, also 
available at the genex site. The third gives the second version in GO ontology 
syntax (with standard IDs for each tissue) and can be downloaded from both the 
genex and the Open Biological Ontology sites (http://obo.sourceforge.net/).

DOI: 10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.00224.x
PMCID: PMC1571174
PMID: 14620375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]