---
reference_id: PMID:30407532
title: 'MaizeGDB 2018: the maize multi-genome genetics and genomics database'
authors:
- Portwood JL 2nd
- Woodhouse MR
- Cannon EK
- Gardiner JM
- Harper LC
- Schaeffer ML
- Walsh JR
- Sen TZ
- Cho KT
- Schott DA
- Braun BL
- Dietze M
- Dunfee B
- Elsik CG
- Manchanda N
- Coe E
- Sachs M
- Stinard P
- Tolbert J
- Zimmerman S
- Andorf CM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1046
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MaizeGDB 2018: the maize multi-genome genetics and genomics database
**Authors:** Portwood JL 2nd, Woodhouse MR, Cannon EK, Gardiner JM, Harper LC, Schaeffer ML, Walsh JR, Sen TZ, Cho KT, Schott DA, Braun BL, Dietze M, Dunfee B, Elsik CG, Manchanda N, Coe E, Sachs M, Stinard P, Tolbert J, Zimmerman S, Andorf CM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky1046](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1046)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D1146-D1154. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1046.

MaizeGDB 2018: the maize multi-genome genetics and genomics database.

Since its 2015 update, MaizeGDB, the Maize Genetics and Genomics database, has
expanded to support the sequenced genomes of many maize inbred lines in addition
to the B73 reference genome assembly. Curation and development efforts have
targeted high quality datasets and tools to support maize trait analysis,
germplasm analysis, genetic studies, and breeding. MaizeGDB hosts a wide range
of data including recent support of new data types including genome metadata,
RNA-seq, proteomics, synteny, and large-scale diversity. To improve access and
visualization of data types several new tools have been implemented to: access
large-scale maize diversity data (SNPversity), download and compare gene
expression data (qTeller), visualize pedigree data (Pedigree Viewer), link genes
with phenotype images (MaizeDIG), and enable flexible user-specified queries to
the MaizeGDB database (MaizeMine). MaizeGDB also continues to be the community
hub for maize research, coordinating activities and providing technical support
to the maize research community. Here we report the changes MaizeGDB has made
within the last three years to keep pace with recent software and research
advances, as well as the pan-genomic landscape that cheaper and better
sequencing technologies have made possible. MaizeGDB is accessible online at
https://www.maizegdb.org.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1046
PMID: 30407532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
