---
reference_id: PMID:25348409
title: "Disease Ontology 2015 update: an expanded and updated database of human diseases for linking biomedical knowledge through disease data."
authors:
- Kibbe WA
- Arze C
- Felix V
- Mitraka E
- Bolton E
- Fu G
- Mungall CJ
- Binder JX
- Malone J
- Vasant D
- Parkinson H
- Schriml LM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1011
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- "Databases, Factual"
- Disease
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn"
- Humans
- Internet
- Rare Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease Ontology 2015 update: an expanded and updated database of human diseases for linking biomedical knowledge through disease data.
**Authors:** Kibbe WA, Arze C, Felix V, Mitraka E, Bolton E, Fu G, Mungall CJ, Binder JX, Malone J, Vasant D, Parkinson H, Schriml LM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gku1011](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1011)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D1071-8. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gku1011. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Disease Ontology 2015 update: an expanded and updated database of human diseases 
for linking biomedical knowledge through disease data.

Kibbe WA(1), Arze C(2), Felix V(2), Mitraka E(2), Bolton E(3), Fu G(3), Mungall 
CJ(4), Binder JX(5), Malone J(6), Vasant D(6), Parkinson H(6), Schriml LM(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomedical Informatics and Information Technology, National Cancer 
Institute, 9609 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)PubChem, National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of 
Medicine National Institutes of Health Department of Health and Human Services 
8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.
(4)Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, 
USA.
(5)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, 69117, Germany Bioinformatics Core Facility, 
Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of Luxembourg, 
Esch-sur-Alzette, 4362, Luxembourg.
(6)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.
(7)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA 
lschriml@som.umaryland.edu.

The current version of the Human Disease Ontology (DO) 
(http://www.disease-ontology.org) database expands the utility of the ontology 
for the examination and comparison of genetic variation, phenotype, protein, 
drug and epitope data through the lens of human disease. DO is a biomedical 
resource of standardized common and rare disease concepts with stable 
identifiers organized by disease etiology. The content of DO has had 192 
revisions since 2012, including the addition of 760 terms. Thirty-two percent of 
all terms now include definitions. DO has expanded the number and diversity of 
research communities and community members by 50+ during the past two years. 
These community members actively submit term requests, coordinate biomedical 
resource disease representation and provide expert curation guidance. Since the 
DO 2012 NAR paper, there have been hundreds of term requests and a steady 
increase in the number of DO listserv members, twitter followers and DO website 
usage. DO is moving to a multi-editor model utilizing Protégé to curate DO in 
web ontology language. This will enable closer collaboration with the Human 
Phenotype Ontology, EBI's Ontology Working Group, Mouse Genome Informatics and 
the Monarch Initiative among others, and enhance DO's current asserted view and 
multiple inferred views through reasoning.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1011
PMCID: PMC4383880
PMID: 25348409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]