---
reference_id: PMID:33079988
title: "The Dark Kinase Knowledgebase: an online compendium of knowledge and experimental results of understudied kinases."
authors:
- Berginski ME
- Moret N
- Liu C
- Goldfarb D
- Sorger PK
- Gomez SM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa853
keywords:
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic"
- Internet
- Knowledge Bases
- Phosphotransferases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Dark Kinase Knowledgebase: an online compendium of knowledge and experimental results of understudied kinases.
**Authors:** Berginski ME, Moret N, Liu C, Goldfarb D, Sorger PK, Gomez SM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa853](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa853)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 Jan 8;49(D1):D529-D535. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa853.

The Dark Kinase Knowledgebase: an online compendium of knowledge and 
experimental results of understudied kinases.

Berginski ME(1), Moret N(2), Liu C(2), Goldfarb D(3)(4), Sorger PK(2), Gomez 
SM(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Department of Systems Biology, Harvard 
Program in Therapeutic Science, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in 
St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Institute for Informatics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 
63110, USA.
(5)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA.

Kinases form the backbone of numerous cell signaling pathways, with their 
dysfunction similarly implicated in multiple pathologies. Further facilitated by 
their druggability, kinases are a major focus of therapeutic development efforts 
in diseases such as cancer, infectious disease and autoimmune disorders. While 
their importance is clear, the role or biological function of nearly one-third 
of kinases is largely unknown. Here, we describe a data resource, the Dark 
Kinase Knowledgebase (DKK; https://darkkinome.org), that is specifically focused 
on providing data and reagents for these understudied kinases to the broader 
research community. Supported through NIH's Illuminating the Druggable Genome 
(IDG) Program, the DKK is focused on data and knowledge generation for 162 
poorly studied or 'dark' kinases. Types of data provided through the DKK include 
parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) peptides for quantitative proteomics, protein 
interactions, NanoBRET reagents, and kinase-specific compounds. Higher-level 
data is similarly being generated and consolidated such as tissue gene 
expression profiles and, longer-term, functional relationships derived through 
perturbation studies. Associated web tools that help investigators interrogate 
both internal and external data are also provided through the site. As an 
evolving resource, the DKK seeks to continually support and enhance knowledge on 
these potentially high-impact druggable targets.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa853
PMCID: PMC7778917
PMID: 33079988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]