---
reference_id: PMID:37384147
title: Using knowledge graphs to infer gene expression in plants.
authors:
- Thessen AE
- Cooper L
- Swetnam TL
- Hegde H
- Reese J
- Elser J
- Jaiswal P
journal: Front Artif Intell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/frai.2023.1201002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Using knowledge graphs to infer gene expression in plants.
**Authors:** Thessen AE, Cooper L, Swetnam TL, Hegde H, Reese J, Elser J, Jaiswal P
**Journal:** Front Artif Intell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/frai.2023.1201002](https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2023.1201002)

## Content

1. Front Artif Intell. 2023 Jun 13;6:1201002. doi: 10.3389/frai.2023.1201002. 
eCollection 2023.

Using knowledge graphs to infer gene expression in plants.

Thessen AE(1), Cooper L(2), Swetnam TL(3), Hegde H(4), Reese J(4), Elser J(2), 
Jaiswal P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR, United States.
(3)BIO5 Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States.
(4)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, Berkeley Lab (DOE), 
Berkeley, CA, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Climate change is already affecting ecosystems around the world 
and forcing us to adapt to meet societal needs. The speed with which climate 
change is progressing necessitates a massive scaling up of the number of species 
with understood genotype-environment-phenotype (G×E×P) dynamics in order to 
increase ecosystem and agriculture resilience. An important part of predicting 
phenotype is understanding the complex gene regulatory networks present in 
organisms. Previous work has demonstrated that knowledge about one species can 
be applied to another using ontologically-supported knowledge bases that exploit 
homologous structures and homologous genes. These types of structures that can 
apply knowledge about one species to another have the potential to enable the 
massive scaling up that is needed through in silico experimentation.
METHODS: We developed one such structure, a knowledge graph (KG) using 
information from Planteome and the EMBL-EBI Expression Atlas that connects gene 
expression, molecular interactions, functions, and pathways to homology-based 
gene annotations. Our preliminary analysis uses data from gene expression 
studies in Arabidopsis thaliana and Populus trichocarpa plants exposed to 
drought conditions.
RESULTS: A graph query identified 16 pairs of homologous genes in these two 
taxa, some of which show opposite patterns of gene expression in response to 
drought. As expected, analysis of the upstream cis-regulatory region of these 
genes revealed that homologs with similar expression behavior had conserved 
cis-regulatory regions and potential interaction with similar trans-elements, 
unlike homologs that changed their expression in opposite ways.
DISCUSSION: This suggests that even though the homologous pairs share common 
ancestry and functional roles, predicting expression and phenotype through 
homology inference needs careful consideration of integrating cis and 
trans-regulatory components in the curated and inferred knowledge graph.

Copyright © 2023 Thessen, Cooper, Swetnam, Hegde, Reese, Elser and Jaiswal.

DOI: 10.3389/frai.2023.1201002
PMCID: PMC10298150
PMID: 37384147

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.