---
reference_id: PMID:18688289
title: Translating the Foundational Model of Anatomy into OWL.
authors:
- Noy NF
- Rubin DL
journal: Web Semant
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Translating the Foundational Model of Anatomy into OWL.
**Authors:** Noy NF, Rubin DL
**Journal:** Web Semant (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.001)

## Content

1. Web Semant. 2008;6(2):133-136. doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.001.

Translating the Foundational Model of Anatomy into OWL.

Noy NF, Rubin DL.

The Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) represents the result of manual and 
disciplined modeling of the structural organization of the human body. It is a 
tremendous resource in bioinformatics that facilitates sharing of information 
among applications that use anatomy knowledge. The FMA was developed in Protégé 
and the Protégé frames language is the canonical representation language for the 
FMA. We present a translation of the original Protégé frame representation of 
the FMA into OWL. Our effort is complementary to the earlier efforts to 
represent FMA in OWL and is focused on two main goals: (1) representing only the 
information that is explicitly present in the frames representation of the FMA 
or that can be directly inferred from the semantics of Protégé frames; (2) 
representing all the information that is present in the frames representation of 
the FMA, thus producing an OWL representation for the complete FMA. Our complete 
representation of the FMA in OWL consists of two components: an OWL DL component 
that contains the FMA constructs that are compatible with OWL DL; and an OWL 
Full component that imports the OWL DL component and adds the FMA constructs 
that OWL DL does not allow.

DOI: 10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.001
PMCID: PMC2500209
PMID: 18688289