---
reference_id: PMID:14755292
title: "The HUPO PSI's molecular interaction format--a community standard for the representation of protein interaction data."
authors:
- Hermjakob H
- Montecchi-Palazzi L
- Bader G
- Wojcik J
- Salwinski L
- Ceol A
- Moore S
- Orchard S
- Sarkans U
- von Mering C
- Roechert B
- Poux S
- Jung E
- Mersch H
- Kersey P
- Lappe M
- Li Y
- Zeng R
- Rana D
- Nikolski M
- Husi H
- Brun C
- Shanker K
- Grant SG
- Sander C
- Bork P
- Zhu W
- Pandey A
- Brazma A
- Jacq B
- Vidal M
- Sherman D
- Legrain P
- Cesareni G
- Xenarios I
- Eisenberg D
- Steipe B
- Hogue C
- Apweiler R
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/nbt926
keywords:
- Database Management Systems/standards
- "Databases, Protein/standards"
- Guidelines as Topic
- "Information Storage and Retrieval/methods, standards"
- Internationality
- Natural Language Processing
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Interaction Mapping/methods, standards"
- "Proteins/chemistry, classification, genetics, metabolism"
- "Proteomics/methods, standards"
- Reference Standards
- Software
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The HUPO PSI's molecular interaction format--a community standard for the representation of protein interaction data.
**Authors:** Hermjakob H, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Bader G, Wojcik J, Salwinski L, Ceol A, Moore S, Orchard S, Sarkans U, von Mering C, Roechert B, Poux S, Jung E, Mersch H, Kersey P, Lappe M, Li Y, Zeng R, Rana D, Nikolski M, Husi H, Brun C, Shanker K, Grant SG, Sander C, Bork P, Zhu W, Pandey A, Brazma A, Jacq B, Vidal M, Sherman D, Legrain P, Cesareni G, Xenarios I, Eisenberg D, Steipe B, Hogue C, Apweiler R
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nbt926](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt926)

## Content

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2004 Feb;22(2):177-83. doi: 10.1038/nbt926.

The HUPO PSI's molecular interaction format--a community standard for the 
representation of protein interaction data.

Hermjakob H(1), Montecchi-Palazzi L, Bader G, Wojcik J, Salwinski L, Ceol A, 
Moore S, Orchard S, Sarkans U, von Mering C, Roechert B, Poux S, Jung E, Mersch 
H, Kersey P, Lappe M, Li Y, Zeng R, Rana D, Nikolski M, Husi H, Brun C, Shanker 
K, Grant SG, Sander C, Bork P, Zhu W, Pandey A, Brazma A, Jacq B, Vidal M, 
Sherman D, Legrain P, Cesareni G, Xenarios I, Eisenberg D, Steipe B, Hogue C, 
Apweiler R.

Author information:
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, EBI-Hinxton, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, 
Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. hhe@ebi.ac.uk

A major goal of proteomics is the complete description of the protein 
interaction network underlying cell physiology. A large number of small scale 
and, more recently, large-scale experiments have contributed to expanding our 
understanding of the nature of the interaction network. However, the necessary 
data integration across experiments is currently hampered by the fragmentation 
of publicly available protein interaction data, which exists in different 
formats in databases, on authors' websites or sometimes only in print 
publications. Here, we propose a community standard data model for the 
representation and exchange of protein interaction data. This data model has 
been jointly developed by members of the Proteomics Standards Initiative (PSI), 
a work group of the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO), and is supported by 
major protein interaction data providers, in particular the Biomolecular 
Interaction Network Database (BIND), Cellzome (Heidelberg, Germany), the 
Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP), Dana Farber Cancer Institute (Boston, 
MA, USA), the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD), Hybrigenics (Paris, 
France), the European Bioinformatics Institute's (EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, UK) IntAct, 
the Molecular Interactions (MINT, Rome, Italy) database, the Protein-Protein 
Interaction Database (PPID, Edinburgh, UK) and the Search Tool for the Retrieval 
of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING, EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany).

DOI: 10.1038/nbt926
PMID: 14755292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]