---
reference_id: PMID:37904585
title: "DisProt in 2024: improving function annotation of intrinsically disordered proteins."
authors:
- Aspromonte MC
- Nugnes MV
- Quaglia F
- Bouharoua A
- DisProt Consortium
- Tosatto SCE
- Piovesan D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad928
keywords:
- "Databases, Protein"
- Gene Ontology
- Intrinsically Disordered Proteins/chemistry
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DisProt in 2024: improving function annotation of intrinsically disordered proteins.
**Authors:** Aspromonte MC, Nugnes MV, Quaglia F, Bouharoua A, DisProt Consortium, Tosatto SCE, Piovesan D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkad928](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad928)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Jan 5;52(D1):D434-D441. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad928.

DisProt in 2024: improving function annotation of intrinsically disordered 
proteins.

Aspromonte MC(1), Nugnes MV(1), Quaglia F(1)(2), Bouharoua A(1); DisProt 
Consortium; Tosatto SCE(1), Piovesan D(1).

Collaborators: Sagris V, Promponas VJ, Chasapi A, Fichó E, Balatti GE, Parisi G, 
Buitrón MG, Erdos G, Pajkos M, Dosztányi Z, Dobson L, Conte AD, Clementel D, 
Salladini E, Leonardi E, Kordevani F, Ghafouri H, Ku LGT, Monzon AM, Ferrari C, 
Kálmán Z, Nilsson JF, Santos J, Pintado-Grima C, Ventura S, Ács V, Pancsa R, 
Kulik MG, Andrade-Navarro MA, Pereira PJB, Longhi S, Mercier PL, Bergier J, 
Tompa P, Lazar T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies, 
National Research Council (CNR-IBIOM), Bari, Italy.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2025 Feb 27;53(5):gkaf228. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaf228.

DisProt (URL: https://disprot.org) is the gold standard database for 
intrinsically disordered proteins and regions, providing valuable information 
about their functions. The latest version of DisProt brings significant 
advancements, including a broader representation of functions and an enhanced 
curation process. These improvements aim to increase both the quality of 
annotations and their coverage at the sequence level. Higher coverage has been 
achieved by adopting additional evidence codes. Quality of annotations has been 
improved by systematically applying Minimum Information About Disorder 
Experiments (MIADE) principles and reporting all the details of the experimental 
setup that could potentially influence the structural state of a protein. The 
DisProt database now includes new thematic datasets and has expanded the 
adoption of Gene Ontology terms, resulting in an extensive functional repertoire 
which is automatically propagated to UniProtKB. Finally, we show that DisProt's 
curated annotations strongly correlate with disorder predictions inferred from 
AlphaFold2 pLDDT (predicted Local Distance Difference Test) confidence scores. 
This comparison highlights the utility of DisProt in explaining apparent 
uncertainty of certain well-defined predicted structures, which often correspond 
to folding-upon-binding fragments. Overall, DisProt serves as a comprehensive 
resource, combining experimental evidence of disorder information to enhance our 
understanding of intrinsically disordered proteins and their functional 
implications.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad928
PMCID: PMC10767923
PMID: 37904585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]