---
reference_id: PMID:25378312
title: "T3DB: the toxic exposome database."
authors:
- Wishart D
- Arndt D
- Pon A
- Sajed T
- Guo AC
- Djoumbou Y
- Knox C
- Wilson M
- Liang Y
- Grant J
- Liu Y
- Goldansaz SA
- Rappaport SM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1004
keywords:
- "Databases, Chemical"
- Environmental Exposure
- "Hazardous Substances/chemistry, toxicity"
- Humans
- Internet
content_type: abstract_only
---

# T3DB: the toxic exposome database.
**Authors:** Wishart D, Arndt D, Pon A, Sajed T, Guo AC, Djoumbou Y, Knox C, Wilson M, Liang Y, Grant J, Liu Y, Goldansaz SA, Rappaport SM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gku1004](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku1004)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D928-34. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gku1004. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

T3DB: the toxic exposome database.

Wishart D(1), Arndt D(2), Pon A(2), Sajed T(2), Guo AC(2), Djoumbou Y(3), Knox 
C(2), Wilson M(2), Liang Y(2), Grant J(2), Liu Y(2), Goldansaz SA(3), Rappaport 
SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, 
Canada Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB 
T6G 2E9, Canada National Institute for Nanotechnology, 11421 Saskatchewan Drive, 
Edmonton, AB T6G 2M9, Canada david.wishart@ualberta.ca.
(2)Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 
2E9, Canada.
(4)Center for Exposure Biology, School of Public Health, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7360, USA.

The exposome is defined as the totality of all human environmental exposures 
from conception to death. It is often regarded as the complement to the genome, 
with the interaction between the exposome and the genome ultimately determining 
one's phenotype. The 'toxic exposome' is the complete collection of chronically 
or acutely toxic compounds to which humans can be exposed. Considerable interest 
in defining the toxic exposome has been spurred on by the realization that most 
human injuries, deaths and diseases are directly or indirectly caused by toxic 
substances found in the air, water, food, home or workplace. The 
Toxin-Toxin-Target Database (T3DB--www.t3db.ca) is a resource that was 
specifically designed to capture information about the toxic exposome. 
Originally released in 2010, the first version of T3DB contained data on nearly 
2900 common toxic substances along with detailed information on their chemical 
properties, descriptions, targets, toxic effects, toxicity thresholds, sequences 
(for both targets and toxins), mechanisms and references. To more closely align 
itself with the needs of epidemiologists, toxicologists and exposome scientists, 
the latest release of T3DB has been substantially upgraded to include many more 
compounds (>3600), targets (>2000) and gene expression datasets (>15,000 genes). 
It now includes extensive data on 'normal' toxic compound concentrations in 
human biofluids as well as detailed chemical taxonomies, informative chemical 
ontologies and a large number of referential NMR, MS/MS and GC-MS spectra. This 
manuscript describes the most recent update to the T3DB, which was previously 
featured in the 2010 NAR Database Issue.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1004
PMCID: PMC4383875
PMID: 25378312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]