---
reference_id: PMID:34986598
title: "ECO: the Evidence and Conclusion Ontology, an update for 2022."
authors:
- Nadendla S
- Jackson R
- Munro J
- Quaglia F
- Mészáros B
- Olley D
- Hobbs ET
- Goralski SM
- Chibucos M
- Mungall CJ
- Tosatto SCE
- Erill I
- Giglio MG
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1025
keywords:
- Computational Biology/standards
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Ontology
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ECO: the Evidence and Conclusion Ontology, an update for 2022.
**Authors:** Nadendla S, Jackson R, Munro J, Quaglia F, Mészáros B, Olley D, Hobbs ET, Goralski SM, Chibucos M, Mungall CJ, Tosatto SCE, Erill I, Giglio MG
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab1025](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1025)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D1515-D1521. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1025.

ECO: the Evidence and Conclusion Ontology, an update for 2022.

Nadendla S(1), Jackson R(1), Munro J(1), Quaglia F(2)(3), Mészáros B(4), Olley 
D(1), Hobbs ET(5), Goralski SM(5), Chibucos M(1), Mungall CJ(6), Tosatto SCE(3), 
Erill I(5), Giglio MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies, 
National Research Council (CNR-IBIOM), Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg 69117, Germany.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States.
(6)Division of Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Lab, Berkeley, California, USA.

The Evidence and Conclusion Ontology (ECO) is a community resource that provides 
an ontology of terms used to capture the type of evidence that supports 
biomedical annotations and assertions. Consistent capture of evidence 
information with ECO allows tracking of annotation provenance, establishment of 
quality control measures, and evidence-based data mining. ECO is in use by 
dozens of data repositories and resources with both specific and general areas 
of focus. ECO is continually being expanded and enhanced in response to user 
requests as well as our aim to adhere to community best-practices for ontology 
development. The ECO support team engages in multiple collaborations with other 
ontologies and annotating groups. Here we report on recent updates to the ECO 
ontology itself as well as associated resources that are available through this 
project. ECO project products are freely available for download from the project 
website (https://evidenceontology.org/) and GitHub 
(https://github.com/evidenceontology/evidenceontology). ECO is released into the 
public domain under a CC0 1.0 Universal license.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1025
PMCID: PMC8728134
PMID: 34986598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]