---
reference_id: PMID:24499703
title: The pathway ontology - updates and applications.
authors:
- Petri V
- Jayaraman P
- Tutaj M
- Hayman GT
- Smith JR
- De Pons J
- Laulederkind SJ
- Lowry TF
- Nigam R
- Wang SJ
- Shimoyama M
- Dwinell MR
- Munzenmaier DH
- Worthey EA
- Jacob HJ
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathway ontology - updates and applications.
**Authors:** Petri V, Jayaraman P, Tutaj M, Hayman GT, Smith JR, De Pons J, Laulederkind SJ, Lowry TF, Nigam R, Wang SJ, Shimoyama M, Dwinell MR, Munzenmaier DH, Worthey EA, Jacob HJ
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-7)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Feb 5;5(1):7. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-7.

The pathway ontology - updates and applications.

Petri V(1), Jayaraman P, Tutaj M, Hayman GT, Smith JR, De Pons J, Laulederkind 
SJ, Lowry TF, Nigam R, Wang SJ, Shimoyama M, Dwinell MR, Munzenmaier DH, Worthey 
EA, Jacob HJ.

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI, USA. vpetri@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Pathway Ontology (PW) developed at the Rat Genome Database 
(RGD), covers all types of biological pathways, including altered and disease 
pathways and captures the relationships between them within the hierarchical 
structure of a directed acyclic graph. The ontology allows for the standardized 
annotation of rat, and of human and mouse genes to pathway terms. It also 
constitutes a vehicle for easy navigation between gene and ontology report 
pages, between reports and interactive pathway diagrams, between pathways 
directly connected within a diagram and between those that are globally related 
in pathway suites and suite networks. Surveys of the literature and the 
development of the Pathway and Disease Portals are important sources for the 
ongoing development of the ontology. User requests and mapping of pathways in 
other databases to terms in the ontology further contribute to increasing its 
content. Recently built automated pipelines use the mapped terms to make 
available the annotations generated by other groups.
RESULTS: The two released pipelines - the Pathway Interaction Database (PID) 
Annotation Import Pipeline and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) Annotation Import Pipeline, make available over 7,400 and 31,000 pathway 
gene annotations, respectively. Building the PID pipeline lead to the addition 
of new terms within the signaling node, also augmented by the release of the RGD 
"Immune and Inflammatory Disease Portal" at that time. Building the KEGG 
pipeline lead to a substantial increase in the number of disease pathway terms, 
such as those within the 'infectious disease pathway' parent term category. The 
'drug pathway' node has also seen increases in the number of terms as well as a 
restructuring of the node. Literature surveys, disease portal deployments and 
user requests have contributed and continue to contribute additional new terms 
across the ontology. Since first presented, the content of PW has increased by 
over 75%.
CONCLUSIONS: Ongoing development of the Pathway Ontology and the implementation 
of pipelines promote an enriched provision of pathway data. The ontology is 
freely available for download and use from the RGD ftp site at 
ftp://rgd.mcw.edu/pub/ontology/pathway/ or from the National Center for 
Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) BioPortal website at 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/PW.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-7
PMCID: PMC3922094
PMID: 24499703