---
reference_id: PMID:29736190
title: "ONS: an ontology for a standardized description of interventions and observational studies in nutrition."
authors:
- Vitali F
- Lombardo R
- Rivero D
- Mattivi F
- Franceschi P
- Bordoni A
- Trimigno A
- Capozzi F
- Felici G
- Taglino F
- Miglietta F
- De Cock N
- Lachat C
- De Baets B
- De Tré G
- Pinart M
- Nimptsch K
- Pischon T
- Bouwman J
- Cavalieri D
- ENPADASI consortium
journal: Genes Nutr
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12263-018-0601-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ONS: an ontology for a standardized description of interventions and observational studies in nutrition.
**Authors:** Vitali F, Lombardo R, Rivero D, Mattivi F, Franceschi P, Bordoni A, Trimigno A, Capozzi F, Felici G, Taglino F, Miglietta F, De Cock N, Lachat C, De Baets B, De Tré G, Pinart M, Nimptsch K, Pischon T, Bouwman J, Cavalieri D, ENPADASI consortium
**Journal:** Genes Nutr (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12263-018-0601-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12263-018-0601-y)

## Content

1. Genes Nutr. 2018 Apr 30;13:12. doi: 10.1186/s12263-018-0601-y. eCollection
2018.

ONS: an ontology for a standardized description of interventions and 
observational studies in nutrition.

Vitali F(#)(1)(2), Lombardo R(#)(3), Rivero D(2), Mattivi F(4)(5), Franceschi 
P(4), Bordoni A(6), Trimigno A(6), Capozzi F(6), Felici G(7), Taglino F(7), 
Miglietta F(1), De Cock N(8), Lachat C(8), De Baets B(9), De Tré G(10), Pinart 
M(11), Nimptsch K(11), Pischon T(11), Bouwman J(12), Cavalieri D(1)(2); ENPADASI 
consortium.

Author information:
(1)1Institute of Biometeorology (IBIMET), National Research Council (CNR), Via 
Giovanni Caproni, 8, 50145 Florence, FI Italy.
(2)4Department of Biology, University of Florence, Via Madonna del Piano, 6, 
50019 Sesto F, FI Italy.
(3)2The Microsoft Research - University of Trento Centre for Computational and 
Systems Biology (COSBI), Piazza Manifattura, 1, I-38068 Rovereto, TN Italy.
(4)5Food Quality and Nutrition Department, Research and Innovation Centre, 
Edmund Mach Foundation, Via Edmund Mach, 1, 38010 San Michele all'Adige, TN 
Italy.
(5)12Center Agriculture Food Environment, University of Trento, San Michele 
all'Adige, Italy.
(6)6Department of Agri-Food Sciences and Technologies, University of Bologna, 
Piazza Goidanich 60, Cesena, FC Italy.
(7)7Institute for Systems Analysis and Computer Science (IASI), National 
Research Council (CNR), Via dei Taurini, 19, 00185 Rome, RM Italy.
(8)3Department of Food Technology, Safety and Health, Ghent University, Coupure 
links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(9)8KERMIT, Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modelling, Ghent 
University, Coupure links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(10)9Department of Telecommunications and Information Processing, Ghent 
University, Coupure links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(11)10Molecular Epidemiology Research Group, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(12)11Microbiology and Systems Biology, TNO, Utrechtseweg 48, 3704HE Zeist, The 
Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The multidisciplinary nature of nutrition research is one of its 
main strengths. At the same time, however, it presents a major obstacle to 
integrate data analysis, especially for the terminological and semantic 
interpretations that specific research fields or communities are used to. To 
date, a proper ontology to structure and formalize the concepts used for the 
description of nutritional studies is still lacking.
RESULTS: We have developed the Ontology for Nutritional Studies (ONS) by 
harmonizing selected pre-existing de facto ontologies with novel health and 
nutritional terminology classifications. The ONS is the result of a scholarly 
consensus of 51 research centers in nine European countries. The ontology 
classes and relations are commonly encountered while conducting, storing, 
harmonizing, integrating, describing, and searching nutritional studies. The ONS 
facilitates the description and specification of complex nutritional studies as 
demonstrated with two application scenarios.
CONCLUSIONS: The ONS is the first systematic effort to provide a solid and 
extensible formal ontology framework for nutritional studies. Integration of new 
information can be easily achieved by the addition of extra modules (i.e., 
nutrigenomics, metabolomics, nutrikinetics, and quality appraisal). The ONS 
provides a unified and standardized terminology for nutritional studies as a 
resource for nutrition researchers who might not necessarily be familiar with 
ontologies and standardization concepts.

DOI: 10.1186/s12263-018-0601-y
PMCID: PMC5928560
PMID: 29736190

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicableThe authors declare that they have 
no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.