---
reference_id: PMID:22110037
title: "Saccharomyces Genome Database: the genomics resource of budding yeast."
authors:
- Cherry JM
- Hong EL
- Amundsen C
- Balakrishnan R
- Binkley G
- Chan ET
- Christie KR
- Costanzo MC
- Dwight SS
- Engel SR
- Fisk DG
- Hirschman JE
- Hitz BC
- Karra K
- Krieger CJ
- Miyasato SR
- Nash RS
- Park J
- Skrzypek MS
- Simison M
- Weng S
- Wong ED
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1029
keywords:
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genes, Fungal"
- "Genome, Fungal"
- Genomics
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Phenotype
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics
- Software
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Saccharomyces Genome Database: the genomics resource of budding yeast.
**Authors:** Cherry JM, Hong EL, Amundsen C, Balakrishnan R, Binkley G, Chan ET, Christie KR, Costanzo MC, Dwight SS, Engel SR, Fisk DG, Hirschman JE, Hitz BC, Karra K, Krieger CJ, Miyasato SR, Nash RS, Park J, Skrzypek MS, Simison M, Weng S, Wong ED
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkr1029](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr1029)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(Database issue):D700-5. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkr1029.  Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Saccharomyces Genome Database: the genomics resource of budding yeast.

Cherry JM(1), Hong EL, Amundsen C, Balakrishnan R, Binkley G, Chan ET, Christie 
KR, Costanzo MC, Dwight SS, Engel SR, Fisk DG, Hirschman JE, Hitz BC, Karra K, 
Krieger CJ, Miyasato SR, Nash RS, Park J, Skrzypek MS, Simison M, Weng S, Wong 
ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5120, USA. 
cherry@stanford.edu

The Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, http://www.yeastgenome.org) is the 
community resource for the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The SGD 
project provides the highest-quality manually curated information from 
peer-reviewed literature. The experimental results reported in the literature 
are extracted and integrated within a well-developed database. These data are 
combined with quality high-throughput results and provided through Locus Summary 
pages, a powerful query engine and rich genome browser. The acquisition, 
integration and retrieval of these data allow SGD to facilitate experimental 
design and analysis by providing an encyclopedia of the yeast genome, its 
chromosomal features, their functions and interactions. Public access to these 
data is provided to researchers and educators via web pages designed for optimal 
ease of use.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr1029
PMCID: PMC3245034
PMID: 22110037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]