---
reference_id: PMID:40963406
title: Expanding and refining the Mammalian Phenotype Ontology to enhance disease model discovery.
authors:
- Bello SM
- Anagnostopoulos AV
- Carmody LC
- Matentzoglu N
- Smith CL
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.052385
keywords:
- Animals
- Phenotype
- Humans
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Biological Ontologies
- Mammals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding and refining the Mammalian Phenotype Ontology to enhance disease model discovery.
**Authors:** Bello SM, Anagnostopoulos AV, Carmody LC, Matentzoglu N, Smith CL
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.052385](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.052385)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2025 Oct 1;18(10):dmm052385. doi: 10.1242/dmm.052385. Epub
2025  Oct 28.

Expanding and refining the Mammalian Phenotype Ontology to enhance disease model 
discovery.

Bello SM(1), Anagnostopoulos AV(1), Carmody LC(2), Matentzoglu N(3), Smith 
CL(1).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
(2)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA.
(3)Semanticly, Athens, Attiki 10563, Greece.

The mouse is a premier model system for investigating gene function and modeling 
human disease. For almost 40 years, Mouse Genome Informatics has worked to 
capture and integrate the data generated from mouse studies. A critical 
component of this integration is the development and use of the Mammalian 
Phenotype (MP) Ontology to capture the morphological and physiological effects 
of alterations to gene function in the mouse. As the wealth of phenotype data 
captured using the MP has expanded, its utility in the diagnosis of human 
disease has increased. Tools have been developed to use mouse and human 
phenotypes in variant identification. To enhance the applicability of the MP in 
disease diagnosis and increase the ability of researchers to find models for 
specific research questions, we have undertaken a disease-focused expansion of 
the MP. In addition, we have worked to improve the alignment of the MP to the 
Human Phenotype Ontology to make automated translation between mouse and human 
phenotypes easier and more reliable.

© 2025. Published by The Company of Biologists.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.052385
PMCID: PMC12590472
PMID: 40963406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.