---
reference_id: PMID:35317743
title: "The Xenopus phenotype ontology: bridging model organism phenotype data to human health and development."
authors:
- Fisher ME
- Segerdell E
- Matentzoglu N
- Nenni MJ
- Fortriede JD
- Chu S
- Pells TJ
- Osumi-Sutherland D
- Chaturvedi P
- James-Zorn C
- Sundararaj N
- Lotay VS
- Ponferrada V
- Wang DZ
- Kim E
- Agalakov S
- Arshinoff BI
- Karimi K
- Vize PD
- Zorn AM
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12859-022-04636-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Biological Ontologies
- Gene Ontology
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Xenopus laevis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Xenopus phenotype ontology: bridging model organism phenotype data to human health and development.
**Authors:** Fisher ME, Segerdell E, Matentzoglu N, Nenni MJ, Fortriede JD, Chu S, Pells TJ, Osumi-Sutherland D, Chaturvedi P, James-Zorn C, Sundararaj N, Lotay VS, Ponferrada V, Wang DZ, Kim E, Agalakov S, Arshinoff BI, Karimi K, Vize PD, Zorn AM
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12859-022-04636-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-022-04636-8)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2022 Mar 22;23(1):99. doi: 10.1186/s12859-022-04636-8.

The Xenopus phenotype ontology: bridging model organism phenotype data to human 
health and development.

Fisher ME(1), Segerdell E(1), Matentzoglu N(2)(3)(4), Nenni MJ(1), Fortriede 
JD(1), Chu S(5), Pells TJ(5), Osumi-Sutherland D(4), Chaturvedi P(1), James-Zorn 
C(1), Sundararaj N(1), Lotay VS(5), Ponferrada V(1), Wang DZ(5), Kim E(5), 
Agalakov S(5), Arshinoff BI(5), Karimi K(5), Vize PD(5), Zorn AM(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Monarch Initiative, London, UK.
(3)Semanticly Ltd, London, UK.
(4)European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, UK.
(5)Department of Biological Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(6)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. aaron.zorn@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: Ontologies of precisely defined, controlled vocabularies are 
essential to curate the results of biological experiments such that the data are 
machine searchable, can be computationally analyzed, and are interoperable 
across the biomedical research continuum. There is also an increasing need for 
methods to interrelate phenotypic data easily and accurately from experiments in 
animal models with human development and disease.
RESULTS: Here we present the Xenopus phenotype ontology (XPO) to annotate 
phenotypic data from experiments in Xenopus, one of the major vertebrate model 
organisms used to study gene function in development and disease. The XPO 
implements design patterns from the Unified Phenotype Ontology (uPheno), and the 
principles outlined by the Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies (OBO 
Foundry) to maximize interoperability with other species and facilitate ongoing 
ontology management. Constructed in Web Ontology Language (OWL) the XPO combines 
the existing uPheno library of ontology design patterns with additional terms 
from the Xenopus Anatomy Ontology (XAO), the Phenotype and Trait Ontology (PATO) 
and the Gene Ontology (GO). The integration of these different ontologies into 
the XPO enables rich phenotypic curation, whilst the uPheno bridging axioms 
allows phenotypic data from Xenopus experiments to be related to phenotype data 
from other model organisms and human disease. Moreover, the simple post-composed 
uPheno design patterns facilitate ongoing XPO development as the generation of 
new terms and classes of terms can be substantially automated.
CONCLUSIONS: The XPO serves as an example of current best practices to help 
overcome many of the inherent challenges in harmonizing phenotype data between 
different species. The XPO currently consists of approximately 22,000 terms and 
is being used to curate phenotypes by Xenbase, the Xenopus Model Organism 
Knowledgebase, forming a standardized corpus of genotype-phenotype data that can 
be directly related to other uPheno compliant resources.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-022-04636-8
PMCID: PMC8939077
PMID: 35317743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
Interests.