---
reference_id: PMID:37963467
title: "The Medical Action Ontology: A tool for annotating and analyzing treatments and clinical management of human disease."
authors:
- Carmody LC
- Gargano MA
- Toro S
- Vasilevsky NA
- Adam MP
- Blau H
- Chan LE
- Gomez-Andres D
- Horvath R
- Kraus ML
- Ladewig MS
- Lewis-Smith D
- Lochmüller H
- Matentzoglu NA
- Munoz-Torres MC
- Schuetz C
- Seitz B
- Similuk MN
- Sparks TN
- Strauss T
- Swietlik EM
- Thompson R
- Zhang XA
- Mungall CJ
- Haendel MA
- Robinson PN
journal: Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2023.10.003
keywords:
- Humans
- Biological Ontologies
- Rare Diseases
- Software
- Computer Simulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Medical Action Ontology: A tool for annotating and analyzing treatments and clinical management of human disease.
**Authors:** Carmody LC, Gargano MA, Toro S, Vasilevsky NA, Adam MP, Blau H, Chan LE, Gomez-Andres D, Horvath R, Kraus ML, Ladewig MS, Lewis-Smith D, Lochmüller H, Matentzoglu NA, Munoz-Torres MC, Schuetz C, Seitz B, Similuk MN, Sparks TN, Strauss T, Swietlik EM, Thompson R, Zhang XA, Mungall CJ, Haendel MA, Robinson PN
**Journal:** Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medj.2023.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medj.2023.10.003)

## Content

1. Med. 2023 Dec 8;4(12):913-927.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2023.10.003. Epub 2023
Nov  13.

The Medical Action Ontology: A tool for annotating and analyzing treatments and 
clinical management of human disease.

Carmody LC(1), Gargano MA(1), Toro S(2), Vasilevsky NA(3), Adam MP(4), Blau 
H(1), Chan LE(5), Gomez-Andres D(6), Horvath R(7), Kraus ML(2), Ladewig MS(8), 
Lewis-Smith D(9), Lochmüller H(10), Matentzoglu NA(11), Munoz-Torres MC(2), 
Schuetz C(12), Seitz B(13), Similuk MN(14), Sparks TN(15), Strauss T(12), 
Swietlik EM(16), Thompson R(17), Zhang XA(1), Mungall CJ(18), Haendel MA(2), 
Robinson PN(19).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(2)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Critical Path Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(4)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(6)Pediatric Neurology, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Passeig 
Vall d'Hebron 119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, 
Cambridge CB2 0PY, UK.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Klinikum Saarbrücken, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(9)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(10)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottowa, Canada; 
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, 
Canada; Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; 
Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical Center - University 
of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany; Centro Nacional de Análisis 
Genómico, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Semanticly, Athens, Attiki, Greece.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, 
Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Saarland University Medical Center UKS, 
Homburg, Saar, Germany.
(14)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(15)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, & Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(16)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Heart and Lung Research 
Institute, Cambridge CB2 0BB, UK.
(17)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottowa, Canada.
(18)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(19)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA. Electronic 
address: peter.robinson@jax.org.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Jul 13:2023.07.13.23292612. doi: 10.1101/2023.07.13.23292612.

BACKGROUND: Navigating the clinical literature to determine the optimal clinical 
management for rare diseases presents significant challenges. We introduce the 
Medical Action Ontology (MAxO), an ontology specifically designed to organize 
medical procedures, therapies, and interventions.
METHODS: MAxO incorporates logical structures that link MAxO terms to numerous 
other ontologies within the OBO Foundry. Term development involves a blend of 
manual and semi-automated processes. Additionally, we have generated annotations 
detailing diagnostic modalities for specific phenotypic abnormalities defined by 
the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO). We introduce a web application, POET, that 
facilitates MAxO annotations for specific medical actions for diseases using the 
Mondo Disease Ontology.
FINDINGS: MAxO encompasses 1,757 terms spanning a wide range of biomedical 
domains, from human anatomy and investigations to the chemical and protein 
entities involved in biological processes. These terms annotate phenotypic 
features associated with specific disease (using HPO and Mondo). Presently, 
there are over 16,000 MAxO diagnostic annotations that target HPO terms. Through 
POET, we have created 413 MAxO annotations specifying treatments for 189 rare 
diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: MAxO offers a computational representation of treatments and other 
actions taken for the clinical management of patients. Its development is 
closely coupled to Mondo and HPO, broadening the scope of our computational 
modeling of diseases and phenotypic features. We invite the community to 
contribute disease annotations using POET (https://poet.jax.org/). MAxO is 
available under the open-source CC-BY 4.0 license 
(https://github.com/monarch-initiative/MAxO).
FUNDING: NHGRI 1U24HG011449-01A1 and NHGRI 5RM1HG010860-04.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medj.2023.10.003
PMCID: PMC10842845
PMID: 37963467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.