---
reference_id: PMID:28387809
title: "The anatomy of phenotype ontologies: principles, properties and applications."
authors:
- Gkoutos GV
- Schofield PN
- Hoehndorf R
journal: Brief Bioinform
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx035
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Domestic"
- Biodiversity
- Biological Evolution
- "Biological Ontologies/statistics & numerical data"
- Computational Biology/methods
- Ecology
- "Gene Ontology/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Semantic Web
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The anatomy of phenotype ontologies: principles, properties and applications.
**Authors:** Gkoutos GV, Schofield PN, Hoehndorf R
**Journal:** Brief Bioinform (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bib/bbx035](https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbx035)

## Content

1. Brief Bioinform. 2018 Sep 28;19(5):1008-1021. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx035.

The anatomy of phenotype ontologies: principles, properties and applications.

Gkoutos GV(1), Schofield PN(2), Hoehndorf R(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Birmingham Medical School.
(2)University of Cambridge.
(3)Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division, King 
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, King Abdullah University of 
Science and Technology, Thuwal.

The past decade has seen an explosion in the collection of genotype data in 
domains as diverse as medicine, ecology, livestock and plant breeding. Along 
with this comes the challenge of dealing with the related phenotype data, which 
is not only large but also highly multidimensional. Computational analysis of 
phenotypes has therefore become critical for our ability to understand the 
biological meaning of genomic data in the biological sciences. At the heart of 
computational phenotype analysis are the phenotype ontologies. A large number of 
these ontologies have been developed across many domains, and we are now at a 
point where the knowledge captured in the structure of these ontologies can be 
used for the integration and analysis of large interrelated data sets. The 
Phenotype And Trait Ontology framework provides a method for formal definitions 
of phenotypes and associated data sets and has proved to be key to our ability 
to develop methods for the integration and analysis of phenotype data. Here, we 
describe the development and products of the ontological approach to phenotype 
capture, the formal content of phenotype ontologies and how their content can be 
used computationally.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbx035
PMCID: PMC6169674
PMID: 28387809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]