---
reference_id: PMID:39913645
title: "Transverse Myelitis in a Patient with Lumbar Stenosis: A Case Report and Cautionary Tale."
authors:
- Driskill E
- Wells DK
- Lockey SD
journal: JBJS Case Connect
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2106/JBJS.CC.24.00514
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Myelitis, Transverse/diagnostic imaging, etiology, therapy, complications"
- "Spinal Stenosis/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Aged
- Lumbar Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transverse Myelitis in a Patient with Lumbar Stenosis: A Case Report and Cautionary Tale.
**Authors:** Driskill E, Wells DK, Lockey SD
**Journal:** JBJS Case Connect (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2106/JBJS.CC.24.00514](https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.CC.24.00514)

## Content

1. JBJS Case Connect. 2025 Feb 6;15(1). doi: 10.2106/JBJS.CC.24.00514.
eCollection  2025 Jan 1.

Transverse Myelitis in a Patient with Lumbar Stenosis: A Case Report and 
Cautionary Tale.

Driskill E(1), Wells DK, Lockey SD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Spine Surgery, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of 
Virginia, Virginia.

CASE: We present a case of a 78-year-old man with lumbar stenosis who was 
referred for urgent spine surgery evaluation after the development of 
progressive bilateral lower extremity numbness and gait disturbance. Additional 
workup demonstrated thoracic cord edema consistent with a postviral transverse 
myelitis. He was treated nonoperatively with clinical improvement to his 
baseline at the final follow-up.
CONCLUSION: This case illustrates the importance of maintaining a broad 
differential diagnosis when patients with lumbar stenosis present with atypical 
neurologic symptoms. A thorough history, physical examination, and workup can 
prevent unnecessary spine surgery.

Copyright © 2025 by The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, Incorporated.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.CC.24.00514
PMID: 39913645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest forms are provided with the online version of the article 
(http://links.lww.com/JBJSCC/C552).