---
reference_id: PMID:35348650
title: Evaluating the predictive accuracy of curated biological pathways in a public knowledgebase.
authors:
- Wright AJ
- Orlic-Milacic M
- Rothfels K
- Weiser J
- Trinh QM
- Jassal B
- Haw RA
- Stein LD
journal: Database (Oxford)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/database/baac009
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Biological Phenomena
- "Databases, Factual"
- Humans
- Knowledge Bases
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating the predictive accuracy of curated biological pathways in a public knowledgebase.
**Authors:** Wright AJ, Orlic-Milacic M, Rothfels K, Weiser J, Trinh QM, Jassal B, Haw RA, Stein LD
**Journal:** Database (Oxford) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/database/baac009](https://doi.org/10.1093/database/baac009)

## Content

1. Database (Oxford). 2022 Mar 28;2022:baac009. doi: 10.1093/database/baac009.

Evaluating the predictive accuracy of curated biological pathways in a public 
knowledgebase.

Wright AJ(1), Orlic-Milacic M(1), Rothfels K(1), Weiser J(1), Trinh QM(1), 
Jassal B(1), Haw RA(1), Stein LD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Adaptive Oncology Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, 661 
University Avenue Suite 500, Toronto, ON M5G 0A3, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Room 4396, Medical 
Sciences Building, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.

ABSTRACT: Reactome is a database of human biological pathways manually curated 
from the primary literature and peer-reviewed by experts. To evaluate the 
utility of Reactome pathways for predicting functional consequences of genetic 
perturbations, we compared predictions of perturbation effects based on Reactome 
pathways against published empirical observations. Ten cancer-relevant Reactome 
pathways, representing diverse biological processes such as signal transduction, 
cell division, DNA repair and transcriptional regulation, were selected for 
testing. For each pathway, root input nodes and key pathway outputs were 
defined. We then used pathway-diagram-derived logic graphs to predict, either by 
inspection by biocurators or using a novel algorithm MP-BioPath, the effects of 
bidirectional perturbations (upregulation/activation or 
downregulation/inhibition) of single root inputs on the status of key outputs. 
These predictions were then compared to published empirical tests. In total, 
4968 test cases were analyzed across 10 pathways, of which 847 were supported by 
published empirical findings. Out of the 847 test cases, curators' predictions 
agreed with the experimental evidence in 670 and disagreed in 177 cases, 
resulting in ∼81% overall accuracy. MP-BioPath predictions agreed with 
experimental evidence for 625 and disagreed for 222 test cases, resulting in 
∼75% overall accuracy. The expected accuracy of random guessing was 33%. 
Per-pathway accuracy did not correlate with the number of pathway edges nor the 
number of pathway nodes but varied across pathways, ranging from 56% 
(curator)/44% (MP-BioPath) for 'Mitotic G1 phase and G1/S transition' to 100% 
(curator)/94% (MP-BioPath) for 'RAF/MAP kinase cascade'. This study highlights 
the potential of pathway databases such as Reactome in modeling genetic 
perturbations, promoting standardization of experimental pathway activity 
readout and supporting hypothesis-driven research by revealing relationships 
between pathway inputs and outputs that have not yet been directly 
experimentally tested.
DATABASE URL: www.reactome.org.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baac009
PMCID: PMC9216552
PMID: 35348650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]