---
reference_id: PMID:27406187
title: "The ontology of medically related social entities: recent developments."
authors:
- Hicks A
- Hanna J
- Welch D
- Brochhausen M
- Hogan WR
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0087-8
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- "Demography/statistics & numerical data"
- Health Facilities
- Humans
- Insurance
- Marital Status
- Socioeconomic Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ontology of medically related social entities: recent developments.
**Authors:** Hicks A, Hanna J, Welch D, Brochhausen M, Hogan WR
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-016-0087-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-016-0087-8)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Jul 12;7:47. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0087-8.

The ontology of medically related social entities: recent developments.

Hicks A(1), Hanna J(2), Welch D(2), Brochhausen M(3), Hogan WR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Outcomes and Policy, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL, USA. aehicks@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Health Outcomes and Policy, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Science, Little Rock, AR, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Ontology of Medically Related Social Entities (OMRSE) was 
initially developed in 2011 to provide a framework for modeling demographic data 
in Resource Description Framework/Web Ontology Language. It is built upon the 
Basic Formal Ontology and conforms to Open Biomedical Ontologies Foundry's best 
practices.
DESCRIPTION: We report recent development of OMRSE which includes 
representations of organizations, roles, facilities, demographic data, 
enrollment in insurance plans, and data about socio-economic indicators.
CONCLUSIONS: OMRSE's coverage has been expanding in recent years to include a 
wide variety of classes and has been useful in several biomedical applications.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0087-8
PMCID: PMC4942889
PMID: 27406187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]