---
reference_id: PMID:36134718
title: "RNADisease v4.0: an updated resource of RNA-associated diseases, providing RNA-disease analysis, enrichment and prediction."
authors:
- Chen J
- Lin J
- Hu Y
- Ye M
- Yao L
- Wu L
- Zhang W
- Wang M
- Deng T
- Guo F
- Huang Y
- Zhu B
- Wang D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac814
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Mammals/genetics
- Neoplasms/genetics
- RNA/genetics
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/genetics"
- "RNA, Untranslated"
- Disease/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNADisease v4.0: an updated resource of RNA-associated diseases, providing RNA-disease analysis, enrichment and prediction.
**Authors:** Chen J, Lin J, Hu Y, Ye M, Yao L, Wu L, Zhang W, Wang M, Deng T, Guo F, Huang Y, Zhu B, Wang D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkac814](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac814)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jan 6;51(D1):D1397-D1404. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac814.

RNADisease v4.0: an updated resource of RNA-associated diseases, providing 
RNA-disease analysis, enrichment and prediction.

Chen J(1), Lin J(1), Hu Y(1), Ye M(1), Yao L(1), Wu L(1), Zhang W(1), Wang M(1), 
Deng T(1), Guo F(2), Huang Y(3), Zhu B(4), Wang D(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Tumor Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510515, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(3)Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(4)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Forensic Multi-Omics for Precision 
Identification, School of Forensic Medicine, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510515, China.
(5)Dermatology Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510091, China.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics, Fujian Key Laboratory of Medical 
Bioinformatics, School of Medical Technology and Engineering, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou 350122, China.

Numerous studies have shown that RNA plays an important role in the occurrence 
and development of diseases, and RNA-disease associations are not limited to 
noncoding RNAs in mammals but also exist for protein-coding RNAs. Furthermore, 
RNA-associated diseases are found across species including plants and 
nonmammals. To better analyze diseases at the RNA level and facilitate 
researchers in exploring the pathogenic mechanism of diseases, we decided to 
update and change MNDR v3.0 to RNADisease v4.0, a repository for RNA-disease 
association (http://www.rnadisease.org/ or http://www.rna-society.org/mndr/). 
Compared to the previous version, new features include: (i) expanded data 
sources and categories of species, RNA types, and diseases; (ii) the addition of 
a comprehensive analysis of RNAs from thousands of high-throughput sequencing 
data of cancer samples and normal samples; (iii) the addition of an RNA-disease 
enrichment tool and (iv) the addition of four RNA-disease prediction tools. In 
summary, RNADisease v4.0 provides a comprehensive and concise data resource of 
RNA-disease associations which contains a total of 3 428 058 RNA-disease entries 
covering 18 RNA types, 117 species and 4090 diseases to meet the needs of 
biological research and lay the foundation for future therapeutic applications 
of diseases.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac814
PMCID: PMC9825423
PMID: 36134718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]