---
reference_id: PMID:34871445
title: "piRBase: integrating piRNA annotation in all aspects."
authors:
- Wang J
- Shi Y
- Zhou H
- Zhang P
- Song T
- Ying Z
- Yu H
- Li Y
- Zhao Y
- Zeng X
- He S
- Chen R
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1012
keywords:
- Animals
- "Databases, Nucleic Acid"
- Datasets as Topic
- Genome
- Humans
- Internet
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- Multigene Family
- RNA Splicing
- "RNA, Small Interfering/classification, genetics, metabolism"
- User-Computer Interface
content_type: abstract_only
---

# piRBase: integrating piRNA annotation in all aspects.
**Authors:** Wang J, Shi Y, Zhou H, Zhang P, Song T, Ying Z, Yu H, Li Y, Zhao Y, Zeng X, He S, Chen R
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkab1012](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1012)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 Jan 7;50(D1):D265-D272. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1012.

piRBase: integrating piRNA annotation in all aspects.

Wang J(1)(2)(3)(4), Shi Y(3)(5), Zhou H(1)(2)(3), Zhang P(3)(6), Song T(3), Ying 
Z(1)(2), Yu H(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2)(3), Zhao Y(1)(2)(7), Zeng X(1)(2), He 
S(1)(2)(3)(4)(6), Chen R(1)(2)(3)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)West China Biomedical Big Data Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(2)Med-X Center for Informatics, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of RNA Biology, Center for Big Data Research in Health, 
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100049, China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(6)National Genomics Data Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Advanced Computer 
Research Center, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100190, China.
(8)Guangdong Geneway Decoding Bio-Tech Co. Ltd, Foshan 528316, China.

Piwi-interacting RNAs are a type of small noncoding RNA that have various 
functions. piRBase is a manually curated resource focused on assisting piRNA 
functional analysis. piRBase release v3.0 is committed to providing more 
comprehensive piRNA related information. The latest release covers >181 million 
unique piRNA sequences, including 440 datasets from 44 species. More 
disease-related piRNAs and piRNA targets have been collected and displayed. The 
regulatory relationships between piRNAs and targets have been visualized. In 
addition to the reuse and expansion of the content in the previous version, the 
latest version has additional new content, including gold standard piRNA sets, 
piRNA clusters, piRNA variants, splicing-junction piRNAs, and piRNA expression 
data. In addition, the entire web interface has been redesigned to provide a 
better experience for users. piRBase release v3.0 is free to access, browse, 
search, and download at http://bigdata.ibp.ac.cn/piRBase.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1012
PMCID: PMC8728152
PMID: 34871445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]