---
reference_id: PMID:22728672
title: "A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2; iso-3."
authors:
- Cingolani P
- Platts A
- Wang le L
- Coon M
- Nguyen T
- Wang L
- Land SJ
- Lu X
- Ruden DM
journal: Fly (Austin)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4161/fly.19695
keywords:
- Animals
- Drosophila melanogaster/genetics
- "Genome, Insect"
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Annotation
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Software
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2; iso-3.
**Authors:** Cingolani P, Platts A, Wang le L, Coon M, Nguyen T, Wang L, Land SJ, Lu X, Ruden DM
**Journal:** Fly (Austin) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4161/fly.19695](https://doi.org/10.4161/fly.19695)

## Content

1. Fly (Austin). 2012 Apr-Jun;6(2):80-92. doi: 10.4161/fly.19695.

A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain 
w1118; iso-2; iso-3.

Cingolani P(1), Platts A, Wang le L, Coon M, Nguyen T, Wang L, Land SJ, Lu X, 
Ruden DM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
MI, USA.

We describe a new computer program, SnpEff, for rapidly categorizing the effects 
of variants in genome sequences. Once a genome is sequenced, SnpEff annotates 
variants based on their genomic locations and predicts coding effects. Annotated 
genomic locations include intronic, untranslated region, upstream, downstream, 
splice site, or intergenic regions. Coding effects such as synonymous or 
non-synonymous amino acid replacement, start codon gains or losses, stop codon 
gains or losses, or frame shifts can be predicted. Here the use of SnpEff is 
illustrated by annotating ~356,660 candidate SNPs in ~117 Mb unique sequences, 
representing a substitution rate of ~1/305 nucleotides, between the Drosophila 
melanogaster w(1118); iso-2; iso-3 strain and the reference y(1); cn(1) bw(1) 
sp(1) strain. We show that ~15,842 SNPs are synonymous and ~4,467 SNPs are 
non-synonymous (N/S ~0.28). The remaining SNPs are in other categories, such as 
stop codon gains (38 SNPs), stop codon losses (8 SNPs), and start codon gains 
(297 SNPs) in the 5'UTR. We found, as expected, that the SNP frequency is 
proportional to the recombination frequency (i.e., highest in the middle of 
chromosome arms). We also found that start-gain or stop-lost SNPs in Drosophila 
melanogaster often result in additions of N-terminal or C-terminal amino acids 
that are conserved in other Drosophila species. It appears that the 5' and 3' 
UTRs are reservoirs for genetic variations that changes the termini of proteins 
during evolution of the Drosophila genus. As genome sequencing is becoming 
inexpensive and routine, SnpEff enables rapid analyses of whole-genome 
sequencing data to be performed by an individual laboratory.

DOI: 10.4161/fly.19695
PMCID: PMC3679285
PMID: 22728672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]