---
reference_id: PMID:24103152
title: "The clinical measurement, measurement method and experimental condition ontologies: expansion, improvements and new applications."
authors:
- Smith JR
- Park CA
- Nigam R
- Laulederkind SJ
- Hayman GT
- Wang SJ
- Lowry TF
- Petri V
- Pons JD
- Tutaj M
- Liu W
- Worthey EA
- Shimoyama M
- Dwinell MR
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-26
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical measurement, measurement method and experimental condition ontologies: expansion, improvements and new applications.
**Authors:** Smith JR, Park CA, Nigam R, Laulederkind SJ, Hayman GT, Wang SJ, Lowry TF, Petri V, Pons JD, Tutaj M, Liu W, Worthey EA, Shimoyama M, Dwinell MR
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-4-26](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-4-26)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Oct 8;4(1):26. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-26.

The clinical measurement, measurement method and experimental condition 
ontologies: expansion, improvements and new applications.

Smith JR(1), Park CA, Nigam R, Laulederkind SJ, Hayman GT, Wang SJ, Lowry TF, 
Petri V, Pons JD, Tutaj M, Liu W, Worthey EA, Shimoyama M, Dwinell MR.

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI, USA. shimoyama@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Clinical Measurement Ontology (CMO), Measurement Method Ontology 
(MMO), and Experimental Condition Ontology (XCO) were originally developed at 
the Rat Genome Database (RGD) to standardize quantitative rat phenotype data in 
order to integrate results from multiple studies into the PhenoMiner database 
and data mining tool. These ontologies provide the framework for presenting what 
was measured, how it was measured, and under what conditions it was measured.
RESULTS: There has been a continuing expansion of subdomains in each ontology 
with a parallel 2-3 fold increase in the total number of terms, substantially 
increasing the size and improving the scope of the ontologies. The proportion of 
terms with textual definitions has increased from ~60% to over 80% with greater 
synchronization of format and content throughout the three ontologies. 
Representation of definition source Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) has been 
standardized, including the removal of all non-URI characters, and systematic 
versioning of all ontology files has been implemented. The continued expansion 
and success of these ontologies has facilitated the integration of more than 
60,000 records into the RGD PhenoMiner database. In addition, new applications 
of these ontologies, such as annotation of Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL), have 
been added at the sites actively using them, including RGD and the Animal QTL 
Database.
CONCLUSIONS: The improvements to these three ontologies have been substantial, 
and development is ongoing. New terms and expansions to the ontologies continue 
to be added as a result of active curation efforts at RGD and the Animal QTL 
database. Use of these vocabularies to standardize data representation for 
quantitative phenotypes and quantitative trait loci across databases for 
multiple species has demonstrated their utility for integrating diverse data 
types from multiple sources. These ontologies are freely available for download 
and use from the NCBO BioPortal website at 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1583 (CMO), 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1584 (MMO), and 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1585 (XCO), or from the RGD ftp site 
at ftp://rgd.mcw.edu/pub/ontology/.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-26
PMCID: PMC3882879
PMID: 24103152