---
reference_id: PMID:36271389
title: "A comprehensive update on CIDO: the community-based coronavirus infectious disease ontology."
authors:
- He Y
- Yu H
- Huffman A
- Lin AY
- Natale DA
- Beverley J
- Zheng L
- Perl Y
- Wang Z
- Liu Y
- Ong E
- Wang Y
- Huang P
- Tran L
- Du J
- Shah Z
- Shah E
- Desai R
- Huang HH
- Tian Y
- Merrell E
- Duncan WD
- Arabandi S
- Schriml LM
- Zheng J
- Masci AM
- Wang L
- Liu H
- Smaili FZ
- Hoehndorf R
- Pendlington ZM
- Roncaglia P
- Ye X
- Xie J
- Tang YW
- Yang X
- Peng S
- Zhang L
- Chen L
- Hur J
- Omenn GS
- Athey B
- Smith B
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-022-00279-z
keywords:
- Humans
- SARS-CoV-2
- COVID-19
- Coronavirus
- Pandemics
- Vaccines
- Communicable Diseases
- Amino Acids
- COVID-19 Drug Treatment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A comprehensive update on CIDO: the community-based coronavirus infectious disease ontology.
**Authors:** He Y, Yu H, Huffman A, Lin AY, Natale DA, Beverley J, Zheng L, Perl Y, Wang Z, Liu Y, Ong E, Wang Y, Huang P, Tran L, Du J, Shah Z, Shah E, Desai R, Huang HH, Tian Y, Merrell E, Duncan WD, Arabandi S, Schriml LM, Zheng J, Masci AM, Wang L, Liu H, Smaili FZ, Hoehndorf R, Pendlington ZM, Roncaglia P, Ye X, Xie J, Tang YW, Yang X, Peng S, Zhang L, Chen L, Hur J, Omenn GS, Athey B, Smith B
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-022-00279-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-022-00279-z)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2022 Oct 21;13(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s13326-022-00279-z.

A comprehensive update on CIDO: the community-based coronavirus infectious 
disease ontology.

He Y(1), Yu H(2), Huffman A(3), Lin AY(4)(5), Natale DA(6), Beverley J(5)(7), 
Zheng L(8), Perl Y(9), Wang Z(10), Liu Y(3), Ong E(3), Wang Y(3)(11), Huang 
P(3), Tran L(3), Du J(3), Shah Z(3), Shah E(3), Desai R(3), Huang HH(3)(12), 
Tian Y(13), Merrell E(14), Duncan WD(15), Arabandi S(16), Schriml LM(17), Zheng 
J(18), Masci AM(19), Wang L(20), Liu H(20), Smaili FZ(21), Hoehndorf R(21), 
Pendlington ZM(22), Roncaglia P(22), Ye X(11), Xie J(23), Tang YW(24), Yang 
X(10), Peng S(25), Zhang L(25), Chen L(26), Hur J(27), Omenn GS(3), Athey B(3), 
Smith B(5)(14).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
yongqunh@med.umich.edu.
(2)People's Hospital of Guizhou Province, Guiyang, Guizhou, China. 
yuhong20040416@sina.com.
(3)University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)National Center for Ontological Research, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(6)Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.
(7)The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, USA.
(8)Computer Science and Software Engineering Department, Monmouth University, 
West Long Branch, NJ, USA.
(9)Department of Computer Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, 
NJ, USA.
(10)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
&amp; School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(11)People's Hospital of Guizhou Province, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.
(12)National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(13)Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(14)University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 14260, USA.
(15)University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(16)OntoPro LLC, Houston, TX, USA.
(17)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(18)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(19)Office of Data Science, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(20)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(21)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(22)European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Genome Campus, 
Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK.
(23)School of Bioinformatics, Chongqing University of Posts and 
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China.
(24)Cepheid, Danaher Diagnostic Platform, Shanghai, China.
(25)National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(26)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(27)University of North Dakota School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Grand 
Forks, ND, USA.

BACKGROUND: The current COVID-19 pandemic and the previous SARS/MERS outbreaks 
of 2003 and 2012 have resulted in a series of major global public health crises. 
We argue that in the interest of developing effective and safe vaccines and 
drugs and to better understand coronaviruses and associated disease mechenisms 
it is necessary to integrate the large and exponentially growing body of 
heterogeneous coronavirus data. Ontologies play an important role in 
standard-based knowledge and data representation, integration, sharing, and 
analysis. Accordingly, we initiated the development of the community-based 
Coronavirus Infectious Disease Ontology (CIDO) in early 2020.
RESULTS: As an Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) library ontology, CIDO is open 
source and interoperable with other existing OBO ontologies. CIDO is aligned 
with the Basic Formal Ontology and Viral Infectious Disease Ontology. CIDO has 
imported terms from over 30 OBO ontologies. For example, CIDO imports all 
SARS-CoV-2 protein terms from the Protein Ontology, COVID-19-related phenotype 
terms from the Human Phenotype Ontology, and over 100 COVID-19 terms for 
vaccines (both authorized and in clinical trial) from the Vaccine Ontology. CIDO 
systematically represents variants of SARS-CoV-2 viruses and over 300 amino acid 
substitutions therein, along with over 300 diagnostic kits and methods. CIDO 
also describes hundreds of host-coronavirus protein-protein interactions (PPIs) 
and the drugs that target proteins in these PPIs. CIDO has been used to model 
COVID-19 related phenomena in areas such as epidemiology. The scope of CIDO was 
evaluated by visual analysis supported by a summarization network method. CIDO 
has been used in various applications such as term standardization, inference, 
natural language processing (NLP) and clinical data integration. We have applied 
the amino acid variant knowledge present in CIDO to analyze differences between 
SARS-CoV-2 Delta and Omicron variants. CIDO's integrative host-coronavirus PPIs 
and drug-target knowledge has also been used to support drug repurposing for 
COVID-19 treatment.
CONCLUSION: CIDO represents entities and relations in the domain of coronavirus 
diseases with a special focus on COVID-19. It supports shared knowledge 
representation, data and metadata standardization and integration, and has been 
used in a range of applications.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-022-00279-z
PMCID: PMC9585694
PMID: 36271389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.