---
reference_id: PMID:23658422
title: "FYPO: the fission yeast phenotype ontology."
authors:
- Harris MA
- Lock A
- Bähler J
- Oliver SG
- Wood V
journal: Bioinformatics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt266
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Ontology
- Phenotype
- Schizosaccharomyces/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FYPO: the fission yeast phenotype ontology.
**Authors:** Harris MA, Lock A, Bähler J, Oliver SG, Wood V
**Journal:** Bioinformatics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bioinformatics/btt266](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt266)

## Content

1. Bioinformatics. 2013 Jul 1;29(13):1671-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt266. 
Epub 2013 May 8.

FYPO: the fission yeast phenotype ontology.

Harris MA(1), Lock A, Bähler J, Oliver SG, Wood V.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Systems Biology Centre and Department of Biochemistry, University 
of Cambridge, Sanger Building, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK. 
mah79@cam.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: To provide consistent computable descriptions of phenotype data, 
PomBase is developing a formal ontology of phenotypes observed in fission yeast.
RESULTS: The fission yeast phenotype ontology (FYPO) is a modular ontology that 
uses several existing ontologies from the open biological and biomedical 
ontologies (OBO) collection as building blocks, including the phenotypic quality 
ontology PATO, the Gene Ontology and Chemical Entities of Biological Interest. 
Modular ontology development facilitates partially automated effective 
organization of detailed phenotype descriptions with complex relationships to 
each other and to underlying biological phenomena. As a result, FYPO supports 
sophisticated querying, computational analysis and comparison between different 
experiments and even between species.
AVAILABILITY: FYPO releases are available from the Subversion repository at the 
PomBase SourceForge project page 
(https://sourceforge.net/p/pombase/code/HEAD/tree/phenotype_ontology/). The 
current version of FYPO is also available on the OBO Foundry Web site 
(http://obofoundry.org/).

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt266
PMCID: PMC3694669
PMID: 23658422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]