---
reference_id: PMID:21261995
title: "Worm Phenotype Ontology: integrating phenotype data within and beyond the C. elegans community."
authors:
- Schindelman G
- Fernandes JS
- Bastiani CA
- Yook K
- Sternberg PW
journal: BMC Bioinformatics
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-32
keywords:
- Animals
- Caenorhabditis elegans/genetics
- Information Storage and Retrieval/standards
- Phenotype
- Terminology as Topic
- "Vocabulary, Controlled"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worm Phenotype Ontology: integrating phenotype data within and beyond the C. elegans community.
**Authors:** Schindelman G, Fernandes JS, Bastiani CA, Yook K, Sternberg PW
**Journal:** BMC Bioinformatics (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2105-12-32](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-32)

## Content

1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Jan 24;12:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-32.

Worm Phenotype Ontology: integrating phenotype data within and beyond the C. 
elegans community.

Schindelman G(1), Fernandes JS, Bastiani CA, Yook K, Sternberg PW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Caenorhabditis elegans gene-based phenotype information dates back 
to the 1970's, beginning with Sydney Brenner and the characterization of 
behavioral and morphological mutant alleles via classical genetics in order to 
understand nervous system function. Since then C. elegans has become an 
important genetic model system for the study of basic biological and biomedical 
principles, largely through the use of phenotype analysis. Because of the growth 
of C. elegans as a genetically tractable model organism and the development of 
large-scale analyses, there has been a significant increase of phenotype data 
that needs to be managed and made accessible to the research community. To do 
so, a standardized vocabulary is necessary to integrate phenotype data from 
diverse sources, permit integration with other data types and render the data in 
a computable form.
RESULTS: We describe a hierarchically structured, controlled vocabulary of terms 
that can be used to standardize phenotype descriptions in C. elegans, namely the 
Worm Phenotype Ontology (WPO). The WPO is currently comprised of 1,880 phenotype 
terms, 74% of which have been used in the annotation of phenotypes associated 
with greater than 18,000 C. elegans genes. The scope of the WPO is not 
exclusively limited to C. elegans biology, rather it is devised to also 
incorporate phenotypes observed in related nematode species. We have enriched 
the value of the WPO by integrating it with other ontologies, thereby increasing 
the accessibility of worm phenotypes to non-nematode biologists. We are actively 
developing the WPO to continue to fulfill the evolving needs of the scientific 
community and hope to engage researchers in this crucial endeavor.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a phenotype ontology (WPO) that will help to facilitate 
data retrieval, and cross-species comparisons within the nematode community. In 
the larger scientific community, the WPO will permit data integration, and 
interoperability across the different Model Organism Databases (MODs) and other 
biological databases. This standardized phenotype ontology will therefore allow 
for more complex data queries and enhance bioinformatic analyses.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-32
PMCID: PMC3039574
PMID: 21261995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]