---
reference_id: PMID:36399504
title: Dissecting the invasion of Galleria mellonella by Yersinia enterocolitica reveals metabolic adaptations and a role of a phage lysis cassette in insect killing.
authors:
- Sänger PA
- Wagner S
- Liebler-Tenorio EM
- Fuchs TM
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010991
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Yersinia enterocolitica
- Insecta
- Larva
- Bacteriophages
- Moths
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting the invasion of Galleria mellonella by Yersinia enterocolitica reveals metabolic adaptations and a role of a phage lysis cassette in insect killing.
**Authors:** Sänger PA, Wagner S, Liebler-Tenorio EM, Fuchs TM
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1010991](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1010991)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2022 Nov 18;18(11):e1010991. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010991. 
eCollection 2022 Nov.

Dissecting the invasion of Galleria mellonella by Yersinia enterocolitica 
reveals metabolic adaptations and a role of a phage lysis cassette in insect 
killing.

Sänger PA(1), Wagner S(1), Liebler-Tenorio EM(1), Fuchs TM(1).

Author information:
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Institut für Molekulare Pathogenese, Jena, 
Germany.

The human pathogen Yersinia enterocolitica strain W22703 is characterized by its 
toxicity towards invertebrates that requires the insecticidal toxin complex (Tc) 
proteins encoded by the pathogenicity island Tc-PAIYe. Molecular and 
pathophysiological details of insect larvae infection and killing by this 
pathogen, however, have not been dissected. Here, we applied oral infection of 
Galleria mellonella (Greater wax moth) larvae to study the colonisation, 
proliferation, tissue invasion, and killing activity of W22703. We demonstrated 
that this strain is strongly toxic towards the larvae, in which they proliferate 
by more than three orders of magnitude within six days post infection. Deletion 
mutants of the genes tcaA and tccC were atoxic for the insect. W22703 ΔtccC, in 
contrast to W22703 ΔtcaA, initially proliferated before being eliminated from 
the host, thus confirming TcaA as membrane-binding Tc subunit and TccC as cell 
toxin. Time course experiments revealed a Tc-dependent infection process 
starting with midgut colonisation that is followed by invasion of the hemolymph 
where the pathogen elicits morphological changes of hemocytes and strongly 
proliferates. The in vivo transcriptome of strain W22703 shows that the pathogen 
undergoes a drastic reprogramming of central cell functions and gains access to 
numerous carbohydrate and amino acid resources within the insect. Strikingly, a 
mutant lacking a phage-related holin/endolysin (HE) cassette, which is located 
within Tc-PAIYe, resembled the phenotypes of W22703 ΔtcaA, suggesting that this 
dual lysis cassette may be an example of a phage-related function that has been 
adapted for the release of a bacterial toxin.

Copyright: © 2022 Sänger et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010991
PMCID: PMC9718411
PMID: 36399504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.