---
reference_id: PMID:27842607
title: "The flora phenotype ontology (FLOPO): tool for integrating morphological traits and phenotypes of vascular plants."
authors:
- Hoehndorf R
- Alshahrani M
- Gkoutos GV
- Gosline G
- Groom Q
- Hamann T
- Kattge J
- de Oliveira SM
- Schmidt M
- Sierra S
- Smets E
- Vos RA
- Weiland C
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0107-8
keywords:
- Biological Ontologies
- Phenotype
- "Plants/anatomy & histology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The flora phenotype ontology (FLOPO): tool for integrating morphological traits and phenotypes of vascular plants.
**Authors:** Hoehndorf R, Alshahrani M, Gkoutos GV, Gosline G, Groom Q, Hamann T, Kattge J, de Oliveira SM, Schmidt M, Sierra S, Smets E, Vos RA, Weiland C
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13326-016-0107-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13326-016-0107-8)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Nov 14;7(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0107-8.

The flora phenotype ontology (FLOPO): tool for integrating morphological traits 
and phenotypes of vascular plants.

Hoehndorf R(1)(2), Alshahrani M(3)(4), Gkoutos GV(5)(6)(7), Gosline G(8), Groom 
Q(9), Hamann T(10), Kattge J(11)(12), de Oliveira SM(10), Schmidt M(13), Sierra 
S(10), Smets E(10), Vos RA(10), Weiland C(13).

Author information:
(1)Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), King Abdullah University of 
Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
robert.hoehndorf@kaust.edu.sa.
(2)Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division 
(CEMSE), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 
23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. robert.hoehndorf@kaust.edu.sa.
(3)Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), King Abdullah University of 
Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(4)Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences & Engineering Division 
(CEMSE), King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 4700 KAUST, Thuwal, 
23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(5)College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Institute of Cancer and Genomic 
Sciences, Centre for Computational Biology, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute of Translational Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham, NHS 
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
(7)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth 
University, Aberystwyth, SY23 2AX, United Kingdom.
(8)Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey, TW9 3AB, United Kingdom.
(9)Botanic Garden Meise, Nieuwelaan 38, Meise, 1860, Belgium.
(10)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, P.O. Box 9517, Leiden, 2300 RA, The 
Netherlands.
(11)Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry, Hans Knoell Str. 10, Jena, 07745, 
Germany.
(12)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) 
Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5e, Leipzig, 04103, Germany.
(13)Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F), 
Senckenberganlage 25, Frankfurt am Main, 60325, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The systematic analysis of a large number of comparable plant trait 
data can support investigations into phylogenetics and ecological adaptation, 
with broad applications in evolutionary biology, agriculture, conservation, and 
the functioning of ecosystems. Floras, i.e., books collecting the information on 
all known plant species found within a region, are a potentially rich source of 
such plant trait data. Floras describe plant traits with a focus on morphology 
and other traits relevant for species identification in addition to other 
characteristics of plant species, such as ecological affinities, distribution, 
economic value, health applications, traditional uses, and so on. However, a key 
limitation in systematically analyzing information in Floras is the lack of a 
standardized vocabulary for the described traits as well as the difficulties in 
extracting structured information from free text.
RESULTS: We have developed the Flora Phenotype Ontology (FLOPO), an ontology for 
describing traits of plant species found in Floras. We used the Plant Ontology 
(PO) and the Phenotype And Trait Ontology (PATO) to extract entity-quality 
relationships from digitized taxon descriptions in Floras, and used a formal 
ontological approach based on phenotype description patterns and automated 
reasoning to generate the FLOPO. The resulting ontology consists of 25,407 
classes and is based on the PO and PATO. The classified ontology closely follows 
the structure of Plant Ontology in that the primary axis of classification is 
the observed plant anatomical structure, and more specific traits are then 
classified based on parthood and subclass relations between anatomical 
structures as well as subclass relations between phenotypic qualities.
CONCLUSIONS: The FLOPO is primarily intended as a framework based on which plant 
traits can be integrated computationally across all species and higher taxa of 
flowering plants. Importantly, it is not intended to replace established 
vocabularies or ontologies, but rather serve as an overarching framework based 
on which different application- and domain-specific ontologies, thesauri and 
vocabularies of phenotypes observed in flowering plants can be integrated.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0107-8
PMCID: PMC5109718
PMID: 27842607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]