---
reference_id: PMID:30365026
title: "Victors: a web-based knowledge base of virulence factors in human and animal pathogens."
authors:
- Sayers S
- Li L
- Ong E
- Deng S
- Fu G
- Lin Y
- Yang B
- Zhang S
- Fa Z
- Zhao B
- Xiang Z
- Li Y
- Zhao XM
- Olszewski MA
- Chen L
- He Y
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky999
keywords:
- Animals
- "Communicable Diseases/microbiology, veterinary, virology"
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- "Genome, Fungal"
- "Genome, Viral"
- "Genomics/methods, standards"
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Humans
- Knowledge Bases
- Software
- Virulence Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Victors: a web-based knowledge base of virulence factors in human and animal pathogens.
**Authors:** Sayers S, Li L, Ong E, Deng S, Fu G, Lin Y, Yang B, Zhang S, Fa Z, Zhao B, Xiang Z, Li Y, Zhao XM, Olszewski MA, Chen L, He Y
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gky999](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky999)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D693-D700. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky999.

Victors: a web-based knowledge base of virulence factors in human and animal 
pathogens.

Sayers S(1), Li L(2), Ong E(1), Deng S(1)(3), Fu G(1)(4), Lin Y(1), Yang B(1), 
Zhang S(1), Fa Z(5), Zhao B(1), Xiang Z(1), Li Y(6), Zhao XM(7), Olszewski 
MA(5), Chen L(2)(8)(9), He Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, and Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University 
of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Science, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes 
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, 
Jiangxi 330045, China.
(4)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Fujian Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350013, China.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Health System and Research Service, VA Ann 
Arbor Health Systems, Ann Arbor 48109, MI, USA.
(6)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Municipal 
Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.
(7)Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200433, China.
(8)CAS Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China.
(9)School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University, Shanghai 
201210, China.

Virulence factors (VFs) are molecules that allow microbial pathogens to overcome 
host defense mechanisms and cause disease in a host. It is critical to study VFs 
for better understanding microbial pathogenesis and host defense mechanisms. 
Victors (http://www.phidias.us/victors) is a novel, manually curated, web-based 
integrative knowledge base and analysis resource for VFs of pathogens that cause 
infectious diseases in human and animals. Currently, Victors contains 5296 VFs 
obtained via manual annotation from peer-reviewed publications, with 4648, 179, 
105 and 364 VFs originating from 51 bacterial, 54 viral, 13 parasitic and 8 
fungal species, respectively. Our data analysis identified many VF-specific 
patterns. Within the global VF pool, cytoplasmic proteins were more common, 
while adhesins were less common compared to findings on protective vaccine 
antigens. Many VFs showed homology with host proteins and the human proteins 
interacting with VFs represented the hubs of human-pathogen interactions. All 
Victors data are queriable with a user-friendly web interface. The VFs can also 
be searched by a customized BLAST sequence similarity searching program. These 
VFs and their interactions with the host are represented in a machine-readable 
Ontology of Host-Pathogen Interactions. Victors supports the 'One Health' 
research as a vital source of VFs in human and animal pathogens.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky999
PMCID: PMC6324020
PMID: 30365026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]