---
reference_id: PMID:28291243
title: A standard database for drug repositioning.
authors:
- Brown AS
- Patel CJ
journal: Sci Data
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/sdata.2017.29
keywords:
- Algorithms
- "Databases, Factual"
- Drug Repositioning
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A standard database for drug repositioning.
**Authors:** Brown AS, Patel CJ
**Journal:** Sci Data (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sdata.2017.29](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.29)

## Content

1. Sci Data. 2017 Mar 14;4:170029. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2017.29.

A standard database for drug repositioning.

Brown AS(1), Patel CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, 10 Shattuck St, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Drug repositioning, the process of discovering, validating, and marketing 
previously approved drugs for new indications, is of growing interest to 
academia and industry due to reduced time and costs associated with repositioned 
drugs. Computational methods for repositioning are appealing because they 
putatively nominate the most promising candidate drugs for a given indication. 
Comparing the wide array of computational repositioning methods, however, is a 
challenge due to inconsistencies in method validation in the field. Furthermore, 
a common simplifying assumption, that all novel predictions are false, is 
intellectually unsatisfying and hinders reproducibility. We address this 
assumption by providing a gold standard database, repoDB, that consists of both 
true positives (approved drugs), and true negatives (failed drugs). We have made 
the full database and all code used to prepare it publicly available, and have 
developed a web application that allows users to browse subsets of the data 
(http://apps.chiragjpgroup.org/repoDB/).

DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2017.29
PMCID: PMC5349249
PMID: 28291243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.