---
reference_id: PMID:25009735
title: Unification of multi-species vertebrate anatomy ontologies for comparative biology in Uberon.
authors:
- Haendel MA
- Balhoff JP
- Bastian FB
- Blackburn DC
- Blake JA
- Bradford Y
- Comte A
- Dahdul WM
- Dececchi TA
- Druzinsky RE
- Hayamizu TF
- Ibrahim N
- Lewis SE
- Mabee PM
- Niknejad A
- Robinson-Rechavi M
- Sereno PC
- Mungall CJ
journal: J Biomed Semantics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-21
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unification of multi-species vertebrate anatomy ontologies for comparative biology in Uberon.
**Authors:** Haendel MA, Balhoff JP, Bastian FB, Blackburn DC, Blake JA, Bradford Y, Comte A, Dahdul WM, Dececchi TA, Druzinsky RE, Hayamizu TF, Ibrahim N, Lewis SE, Mabee PM, Niknejad A, Robinson-Rechavi M, Sereno PC, Mungall CJ
**Journal:** J Biomed Semantics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2041-1480-5-21](https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-21)

## Content

1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 May 19;5:21. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-21. eCollection
 2014.

Unification of multi-species vertebrate anatomy ontologies for comparative 
biology in Uberon.

Haendel MA(1), Balhoff JP(2), Bastian FB(3), Blackburn DC(4), Blake JA(5), 
Bradford Y(6), Comte A(3), Dahdul WM(7), Dececchi TA(8), Druzinsky RE(9), 
Hayamizu TF(5), Ibrahim N(10), Lewis SE(11), Mabee PM(8), Niknejad A(3), 
Robinson-Rechavi M(3), Sereno PC(10), Mungall CJ(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics & Epidemiology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-3280, USA ; National Evolutionary Synthesis Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland ; Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Vertebrate Zoology and Anthropology, California Academy of 
Sciences, San Francisco, CA 94118, USA.
(5)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.
(6)The Zebrafish Model Organism Database, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 
97403, USA.
(7)National Evolutionary Synthesis Center, Durham, NC, USA ; Department of 
Biology, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD 57069, USA.
(8)Department of Biology, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD 57069, USA.
(9)Department of Oral Biology, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA.
(10)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(11)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd, Berkeley, CA 94720, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Elucidating disease and developmental dysfunction requires 
understanding variation in phenotype. Single-species model organism anatomy 
ontologies (ssAOs) have been established to represent this variation. 
Multi-species anatomy ontologies (msAOs; vertebrate skeletal, vertebrate 
homologous, teleost, amphibian AOs) have been developed to represent 'natural' 
phenotypic variation across species. Our aim has been to integrate ssAOs and 
msAOs for various purposes, including establishing links between phenotypic 
variation and candidate genes.
RESULTS: Previously, msAOs contained a mixture of unique and overlapping 
content. This hampered integration and coordination due to the need to maintain 
cross-references or inter-ontology equivalence axioms to the ssAOs, or to 
perform large-scale obsolescence and modular import. Here we present the 
unification of anatomy ontologies into Uberon, a single ontology resource that 
enables interoperability among disparate data and research groups. As a 
consequence, independent development of TAO, VSAO, AAO, and vHOG has been 
discontinued.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly broadened Uberon ontology is a unified cross-taxon 
resource for metazoans (animals) that has been substantially expanded to include 
a broad diversity of vertebrate anatomical structures, permitting reasoning 
across anatomical variation in extinct and extant taxa. Uberon is a core 
resource that supports single- and cross-species queries for candidate genes 
using annotations for phenotypes from the systematics, biodiversity, medical, 
and model organism communities, while also providing entities for logical 
definitions in the Cell and Gene Ontologies. THE ONTOLOGY RELEASE FILES 
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ONTOLOGY MERGE DESCRIBED IN THIS MANUSCRIPT ARE AVAILABLE 
AT: http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/uberon/releases/2013-02-21/ CURRENT ONTOLOGY 
RELEASE FILES ARE AVAILABLE ALWAYS AVAILABLE AT: 
http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/uberon/releases/

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-21
PMCID: PMC4089931
PMID: 25009735