---
reference_id: PMID:22096227
title: "MINT, the molecular interaction database: 2012 update."
authors:
- Licata L
- Briganti L
- Peluso D
- Perfetto L
- Iannuccelli M
- Galeota E
- Sacco F
- Palma A
- Nardozza AP
- Santonico E
- Castagnoli L
- Cesareni G
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr930
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Animals
- "Databases, Protein"
- Humans
- Mice
- Protein Interaction Mapping
- "Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Rats
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MINT, the molecular interaction database: 2012 update.
**Authors:** Licata L, Briganti L, Peluso D, Perfetto L, Iannuccelli M, Galeota E, Sacco F, Palma A, Nardozza AP, Santonico E, Castagnoli L, Cesareni G
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkr930](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr930)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(Database issue):D857-61. doi:
10.1093/nar/gkr930.  Epub 2011 Nov 16.

MINT, the molecular interaction database: 2012 update.

Licata L(1), Briganti L, Peluso D, Perfetto L, Iannuccelli M, Galeota E, Sacco 
F, Palma A, Nardozza AP, Santonico E, Castagnoli L, Cesareni G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca 
Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy.

The Molecular INTeraction Database (MINT, http://mint.bio.uniroma2.it/mint/) is 
a public repository for protein-protein interactions (PPI) reported in 
peer-reviewed journals. The database grows steadily over the years and at 
September 2011 contains approximately 235,000 binary interactions captured from 
over 4750 publications. The web interface allows the users to search, visualize 
and download interactions data. MINT is one of the members of the International 
Molecular Exchange consortium (IMEx) and adopts the Molecular Interaction 
Ontology of the Proteomics Standard Initiative (PSI-MI) standards for curation 
and data exchange. MINT data are freely accessible and downloadable at 
http://mint.bio.uniroma2.it/mint/download.do. We report here the growth of the 
database, the major changes in curation policy and a new algorithm to assign a 
confidence to each interaction.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr930
PMCID: PMC3244991
PMID: 22096227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]